Again King Arthur held high festival at Caerleon, at Pentecost, and
gathered round him all the fellowship of the Round Table, and so,
according to his custom, sat and waited till some adventure should
arise, or some knight return to court whose deeds and perils might be
told.

Anon he saw Sir Lancelot and a crowd of knights coming through the doors
and leading in their midst the mighty knight, Sir Tristram. As soon as
King Arthur saw him, he rose up and went through half the hall, and held
out both his hands and cried, "Right welcome to thee, good Sir Tristram,
as welcome art thou as any knight that ever came before into this court.
A long time have I wished for thee amongst my fellowship." Then all the
knights and barons rose up with one accord and came around, and cried
out, "Welcome." Queen Guinevere came also, and many ladies with her, and
all with one voice said the same.

Then the king took Sir Tristram by the hand and led him to the Round
Table and said, "Welcome again for one of the best and gentlest knights
in all the world; a chief in war, a chief in peace, a chief in field and
forest, a chief in the ladies' chamber--right heartily welcome to this
court, and mayest thou long abide in it."

When he had so said he looked at every empty seat until he came to what
had been Sir Marhaus', and there he found written in gold letters, "This
is the seat of the noble knight, Sir Tristram." Whereat they made him,
with great cheer and gladness, a Fellow of the Round Table.

Now the story of Sir Tristram was as follows:--

There was a king of Lyonesse, named Meliodas, married to the sister of
King Mark of Cornwall, a right fair lady and a good. And so it happened
that King Meliodas hunting in the woods was taken by enchantment and
made prisoner in a castle. When his wife Elizabeth heard it she was nigh
mad with grief, and ran into the forest to seek out her lord. But after
many days of wandering and sorrow she found no trace of him, and laid
her down in a deep valley and prayed to meet her death. And so indeed
she did, but ere she died she gave birth in the midst of all her sorrow
to child, a boy, and called him with her latest breath Tristram; for she
said, "His name shall show how sadly he hath come into this world."

Therewith she gave up her ghost, and the gentlewoman who was with her
took the child and wrapped it from the cold as well as she was able, and
lay down with it in her arms beneath the shadow of a tree hard by,
expecting death to come to her in turn.

But shortly after came a company of lords and barons seeking for the
queen, and found the lady and the child and took them home. And on the
next day came King Meliodas, whom Merlin had delivered, and when he
heard of the queen's death his sorrow was greater than tongue can tell.
And anon he buried her solemnly and nobly, and called the child Tristram
as she had desired.

Then for seven years King Meliodas mourned and took no comfort, and all
that time young Tristram was well nourished; but in a while he wedded
with the daughter of Howell, King of Brittany, who, that her own
children might enjoy the kingdom, cast about in her mind how she might
destroy Tristram. So on a certain day she put poison in a silver cup,
where Tristram and her children were together playing, that when he was
athirst he might drink of it and die. But so it happened that her own
son saw the cup, and, thinking it must hold good drink, he climbed and
took it, and drank deeply of it, and suddenly thereafter burst and fell
down dead.

When the queen heard that, her grief was very great, but her anger and
envy were fiercer than before, and soon again she put more poison in the
cup. And by chance one day her husband finding it when thirsty, took it
up and was about to drink therefrom, when, seeing him, she sprang up
with a mighty cry and dashed it from his hands.

At that King Meliodas, wondering greatly, called to mind the sudden
death of his young child, and taking her fiercely by the hand he cried:

"Traitress, tell me what drink is in this cup or I will slay thee in a
moment;" and therewith pulling out his sword he swore by a great oath
to slay her if she straightway told him not the truth.

"Ah, mercy, lord," said she, and fell down at his feet; "mercy, and I
will tell thee all."

And then she told him of her plot to murder Tristram, so that her own
sons might enjoy the kingdom.

"The law shall judge thee," said the king.

And so anon she was tried before the barons, and condemned to be burnt
to death.

But when the fire was made, and she brought out, came Tristram kneeling
at his father's feet and besought of him a favor.

"Whatsoever thou desirest I will give thee," said the king.

"Give me the life, then, of the queen, my step-mother," said he.

"Thou doest wrong to ask it," said Meliodas; "for she would have slain
thee with her poisons if she could, and chiefly for thy sake she ought
to die."

"Sir," said he, "as for that, I beseech thee of thy mercy to forgive it
her, and for my part may God pardon her as I do; and so I pray thee
grant me my boon, and for God's sake hold thee to thy promise."

"If it must be so," said the king, "take thou her life, for to thee I
give it, and go and do with her as thou wilt."

Then went young Tristram to the fire and loosed the queen from all her
bonds and delivered her from death.

And after a great while by his good means the king again forgave and
lived in peace with her, though never more in the same lodgings.

Anon was Tristram sent abroad to France in care of one named Governale.
And there for seven years he learned the language of the land, and all
knightly exercises and gentle crafts, and especially was he foremost in
music and in hunting, and was a harper beyond all others. And when at
nineteen years of age he came back to his father, he was as lusty and
strong of body and as noble of heart as ever man was seen.

Now shortly after his return it befell that King Anguish of Ireland sent
to King Mark of Cornwall for the tribute due to Ireland, but which was
now seven years behindhand. To whom King Mark sent answer, if he would
have it he must send and fight for it, and they would find a champion to
fight against it.

So King Anguish called for Sir Marhaus, his wife's brother, a good
knight of the Round Table, who lived then at his court, and sent him
with a knightly retinue in six great ships to Cornwall. And, casting
anchor by the castle of Tintagil, he sent up daily to King Mark for the
tribute or the champion. But no knight there would venture to assail
him, for his fame was very high in all the realm for strength and
hardihood.

Then made King Mark a proclamation throughout Cornwall, that if any
knight would fight Sir Marhaus he should stand at the king's right hand
forevermore, and have great honor and riches all the rest of his days.
Anon this news came to the land of Lyonesse, and when young Tristram
heard it he was angry and ashamed to think no knight of Cornwall durst
assail the Irish champion. "Alas," said he, "that I am not a knight,
that I might match this Marhaus! I pray you give me leave, sir, to
depart to King Mark's court and beg him of his grace to make me knight."

"Be ruled by thy own courage," said his father.

So Tristram rode away forthwith to Tintagil to King Mark, and went up
boldly to him and said, "Sir, give me the order of knighthood and I will
fight to the uttermost with Sir Marhaus of Ireland."

"What are ye, and whence come ye?" said the king, seeing he was but a
young man, though strong and well made both in body and limb.

"My name is Tristram," said he, "and I was born in the country of
Lyonesse."

"But know ye," said the king, "this Irish knight will fight with none
who be not come of royal blood and near of kin to kings or queens, as he
himself is, for his sister is the Queen of Ireland."

Then said Tristram, "Let him know that I am come both on my father's and
my mother's side of blood as good as his, for my father is King Meliodas
and my mother was that Queen Elizabeth, thy sister, who died in the
forest at my birth."

When King Mark heard that he welcomed him with all his heart, and
knighted him forthwith, and made him ready to go forth as soon as he
would choose, and armed him royally in armor covered with gold and
silver.

Then he sent Sir Marhaus word, "That a better man than he should fight
with him, Sir Tristram of Lyonesse, son of King Meliodas and of King
Mark's own sister." So the battle was ordained to be fought in an island
near Sir Marhaus' ships, and there Sir Tristram landed on the morrow,
with Governale alone attending him for squire, and him he sent back to
the land when he had made himself ready.

When Sir Marhaus and Sir Tristram were thus left alone, Sir Marhaus
said, "Young knight Sir Tristram, what doest thou here? I am full sorry
for thy rashness, for ofttimes have I been assailed in vain, and by the
best knights of the world. Be warned in time, return to them that sent
thee."

"Fair knight, and well-proved knight," replied Sir Tristram, "be sure
that I shall never quit this quarrel till one of us be overcome. For
this cause have I been made knight, and thou shalt know before we part
that though as yet unproved, I am a king's son and firstborn of a queen.
Moreover I have promised to deliver Cornwall from this ancient burden,
or to die. Also, thou shouldst have known, Sir Marhaus, that thy valor
and thy might are but the better reasons why I should assail thee; for
whether I win or lose I shall gain honor to have met so great a knight
as thou art."

Then they began the battle, and tilted at their hardest against each
other, so that both knights and horses fell to the earth. But Sir
Marhaus' spear smote Sir Tristram a great wound in the side. Then,
springing up from their horses, they lashed together with their swords
like two wild boars. And when they had stricken together a great while
they left off strokes and lunged at one another's breasts and visors;
but seeing this availed not they hurtled together again to bear each
other down.

Thus fought they more than half the day, till both were sorely spent and
blood ran from them to the ground on every side. But by this time Sir
Tristram remained fresher than Sir Marhaus and better winded, and with a
mighty stroke he smote him such a buffet as cut through his helm into
his brain-pan, and there his sword stuck in so fast that thrice Sir
Tristram pulled ere he could get it from his head. Then fell Sir Marhaus
down upon his knees, and the edge of Sir Tristram's sword broke off into
his brain-pan. And suddenly when he seemed dead, Sir Marhaus rose and
threw his sword and shield away from him and ran and fled into his ship.
And Tristram cried out after him, "Aha! Sir knight of the Round Table,
dost thou withdraw thee from so young a knight? it is a shame to thee
and all thy kin; I would rather have been hewn into a hundred pieces
than have fled from thee."

But Sir Marhaus answered nothing, and sorely groaning fled away.

"Farewell, Sir knight, farewell," laughed Tristram, whose own voice now
was hoarse and faint with loss of blood; "I have thy sword and shield in
my safe keeping, and will wear them in all places where I ride on my
adventures, and before King Arthur and the Table Round."

Then was Sir Marhaus taken back to Ireland by his company; and as soon
as he arrived his wounds were searched, and when they searched his head
they found therein a piece of Tristram's sword; but all the skill of
surgeons was in vain to move it out. So anon Sir Marhaus died.

But the queen, his sister, took the piece of sword-blade and put it
safely by, for she thought that some day it might help her to revenge
her brother's death.

Meanwhile, Sir Tristram, being sorely wounded, sat down softly on a
little mound and bled passing fast; and in that evil case was found anon
by Governale and King Mark's knights. Then they gently took him up and
brought him in a barge back to the land, and lifted him into a bed
within the castle, and had his wounds dressed carefully.

But for a great while he lay sick, and was likely to have died of the
first stroke Sir Marhaus had given him with the spear, for the point of
it was poisoned. And, though the wisest surgeons and leeches--both men
and women--came from every part, yet could he be by no means cured. At
last came a wise lady, and said plainly that Sir Tristram never should
be healed, until he went and stayed in that same country when the poison
came. When this was understood, the king sent Sir Tristram in a fair and
goodly ship to Ireland, and by fortune he arrived fast by a castle where
the king and queen were. And as the ship was being anchored, he sat upon
his bed and harped a merry lay, and made so sweet a music as was never
equaled.

When the king heard that the sweet harper was a wounded knight, he sent
for him, and asked his name. "I am of the country of Lyonesse," he
answered, "and my name is Tramtrist;" for he dared not tell his true
name lest the vengeance of the queen should fall upon him for her
brother's death.

"Well," said King Anguish, "thou art right welcome here, and shalt have
all the help this land can give thee; but be not anxious if I am at
times cast down and sad, for but lately in Cornwall the best knight in
the world, fighting for my cause, was slain; his name was Sir Marhaus, a
knight of King Arthur's Round Table." And then he told Sir Tristram all
the story of Sir Marhaus' battle, and Sir Tristram made pretense of
great surprise and sorrow, though he knew all far better than the king
himself.

Then was he put in charge of the king's daughter, La Belle Isault, to be
healed of his wound, and she was as fair and noble a lady as men's eyes
might see. And so marvelously was she skilled in medicine, that in a few
days she fully cured him; and in return Sir Tramtrist taught her the
harp; so, before long, they two began to love each other greatly.

But at that time a heathen knight, Sir Palomedes, was in Ireland, and
much cherished by the king and queen. He also loved mightily La Belle
Isault, and never wearied of making her great gifts, and seeking for her
favor, and was ready even to be christened for her sake. Sir Tramtrist
therefore hated him out of measure, and Sir Palomedes was full of rage
and envy against Tramtrist.

And so it befell that King Anguish proclaimed a great tournament to be
held, the prize whereof should be a lady called the Lady of the Launds,
of near kindred to the king: and her the winner of the tournament should
wed in three days afterwards, and possess all her lands. When La Belle
Isault told Sir Tramtrist of this tournament, he said, "Fair lady! I am
yet a feeble knight, and but for thee had been a dead man now: what
wouldest thou I should do? Thou knowest well I may not joust."

"Ah, Tramtrist," said she, "why wilt thou not fight in this tournament?
Sir Palomedes will be there, and will do his mightiest; and therefore be
thou there, I pray thee, or else he will be winner of the prize."

"Madam," said Tramtrist, "I will go, and for thy sake will do my best;
but let me go unknown to all men; and do thou, I pray thee, keep my
counsel, and help me to a disguise."

So on the day of jousting came Sir Palomedes, with a black shield, and
overthrew many knights. And all the people wondered at his prowess; for
on the first day he put to the worse Sir Gawain, Sir Gaheris, Sir
Agravaine, Sir Key, and many more from far and near. And on the morrow
he was conqueror again, and overthrew the king with a hundred knights
and the King of Scotland. But presently Sir Tramtrist rode up to the
lists, having been let out at a privy postern of the castle, where none
could see. La Belle Isault had dressed him in white armor and given him
a white horse and shield, and so he came suddenly into the field as it
had been a bright angel.

As soon as Sir Palomedes saw him he ran at him with a great spear in
rest, but Sir Tramtrist was ready, and at the first encounter hurled him
to the ground. Then there arose a great cry that the knight with the
black shield was overthrown. And Palomedes, sorely hurt and shamed,
sought out a secret way and would have left the field; but Tramtrist
watched him, and rode after him, and bade him stay, for he had not yet
done with him. Then did Sir Palomedes turn with fury, and lash at Sir
Tramtrist with his sword; but at the first stroke Sir Tramtrist smote
him to the earth, and cried, "Do now all my commands, or take thy
death." Then he yielded to Sir Tristram's mercy, and promised to forsake
La Belle Isault, and for twelve months to wear no arms or armor. And
rising up, he cut his armor off him into shreds with rage and madness,
and turned and left the field: and Sir Tramtrist also left the lists,
and rode back to the castle through the postern gate.

Then was Sir Tramtrist long cherished by the King and Queen of Ireland,
and ever with La Belle Isault. But on a certain day, while he was
bathing, came the queen with La Belle Isault by chance into his chamber,
and saw his sword lie naked on the bed: anon she drew it from the
scabbard and looked at it a long while, and both thought it a passing
fair sword; but within a foot and a half of the end there was a great
piece broken out, and while the queen was looking at the gap, she
suddenly remembered the piece of sword-blade that was found in the
brain-pan of her brother Sir Marhaus.

Therewith she turned and cried, "By my faith, this is the felon knight
who slew thy uncle!" And running to her chamber she sought in her casket
for the piece of iron from Sir Marhaus' head and brought it back, and
fitted it in Tristram's sword; and surely did it fit therein as closely
as it had been but yesterday broke out.

Then the queen caught the sword up fiercely in her hand, and ran into
the room where Sir Tristram was yet in his bath, and making straight for
him, had run him through the body, had not his squire, Sir Hebes, got
her in his arms, and pulled the sword away from her.

Then ran she to the king, and fell upon her knees before him, saying,
"Lord and husband, thou hast here in thy house that felon knight who
slew my brother Marhaus!"

"Who is it?" said the king.

"It is Sir Tramtrist!" said she, "whom Isault hath healed."

"Alas!" replied the king, "I am full grieved thereat, for he is a good
knight as ever I have seen in any field; but I charge thee leave thou
him, and let me deal with him."

Then the king went to Sir Tramtrist's chamber and found him all armed
and ready to mount his horse, and said to him, "Sir Tramtrist, it is not
to prove me against thee I come, for it were shameful of thy host to
seek thy life. Depart in peace, but tell me first thy name, and whether
thou slewest my brother, Sir Marhaus."

Then Sir Tristram told him all the truth, and how he had hid his name,
to be unknown in Ireland; and when he had ended, the king declared he
held him in no blame. "Howbeit, I cannot for mine honor's sake retain
thee at this court, for so I should displease my barons, and my wife,
and all her kin."

"Sir," said Sir Tristram, "I thank thee for the goodness thou hast shown
me here, and for the great goodness my lady, thy daughter, hath shown
me; and it may chance to be more for thy advantage if I live than if I
die; for wheresoever I may be, I shall ever seek thy service, and shall
be my lady thy daughter's servant in all places, and her knight in right
and wrong, and shall never fail to do for her as much as knight can do."

Then Sir Tristram went to La Belle Isault, and took his leave of her. "O
gentle knight," said she, "full of grief am I at your departing, for
never yet I saw a man to love so well."

"Madam," said he, "I promise faithfully that all my life I shall be your
knight."

Then Sir Tristram gave her a ring, and she gave him another, and after
that he left her, weeping and lamenting, and went among the barons, and
openly took his leave of them all, saying, "Fair lords, it so befalleth
that I now must depart hence; therefore, if there be any here whom I
have offended or who is grieved with me, let him now say it, and before
I go I will amend it to the utmost of my power. And if there be but one
who would speak shame of me behind my back, let him say it now or never,
and here is my body to prove it on--body against body."

And all stood still and said no word, though some there were of the
queen's kindred who would have assailed him had they dared.

So Sir Tristram departed from Ireland and took the sea and came with a
fair wind to Tintagil. And when the news came to King Mark that Sir
Tristram was returned, healed of his wound, he was passing glad, and so
were all his barons. And when he had visited the king his uncle, he rode
to his father, King Meliodas, and there had all the heartiest welcome
that could be made him. And both the king and queen gave largely to him
of their lands and goods.

Anon he came again to King Mark's court, and there lived in great joy
and pleasure, till within a while the king grew jealous of his fame, and
of the love and favor shown him by all damsels. And as long as King Mark
lived, he never after loved Sir Tristram, though there was much fair
speech between them.

Then it befell upon a certain day that the good knight Sir Bleoberis de
Ganis, brother to Sir Blamor de Ganis, and nigh cousin to Sir Lancelot
of the Lake, came to King Mark's court and asked of him a favor. And
though the king marveled, seeing he was a man of great renown, and a
knight of the Round Table, he granted him all his asking. Then said Sir
Bleoberis, "I will have the fairest lady in your court, at my own
choosing."

"I may not say thee nay," replied the king; "choose therefore, but take
all the issues of thy choice."

So when he had looked around, he chose the wife of Earl Segwarides, and
took her by the hand, and set her upon horseback behind his squire, and
rode forth on his way.

Presently thereafter came in the earl, and rode out straightway after
him in rage. But all the ladies cried out shame upon Sir Tristram that
he had not gone, and one rebuked him foully and called him coward
knight, that he would stand and see a lady forced away from his uncle's
court. But Sir Tristram answered her, "Fair lady, it is not my place to
take part in this quarrel while her lord and husband is here to do it.
Had he not been at this court, peradventure I had been her champion. And
if it so befall that he speed ill, then may it happen that I speak with
that foul knight before he pass out of this realm."

Anon ran in one of Sir Segwarides' squires, and told that his master was
sore wounded, and at the point of death. When Sir Tristram heard that,
he was soon armed and on his horse, and Governale, his servant, followed
him with shield and spear.

And as he rode, he met his cousin Sir Andret, who had been commanded by
King Mark to bring home to him two knights of King Arthur's court who
roamed the country thereabouts seeking adventures.

"What tidings?" said Sir Tristram.

"God help me, never worse," replied his cousin; "for those I went to
bring have beaten and defeated me, and set my message at naught."

"Fair cousin," said Sir Tristram, "ride ye on your way, perchance if I
should meet them ye may be revenged."

So Sir Andret rode into Cornwall, but Sir Tristram rode after the two
knights who had misused him, namely, Sir Sagramour le Desirous, and Sir
Dodinas le Savage. And before long he saw them but a little way before
him.

"Sir," said Governale, "by my advice thou wilt leave them alone, for
they be two well-proved knights of Arthur's court."

"Shall I not therefore rather meet them!" said Sir Tristram, and, riding
swiftly after them, he called to them to stop, and asked them whence
they came, and whither they were going, and what they were doing in
those marches.

Sir Sagramour looked haughtily at Sir Tristram, and made mocking of his
words, and said, "Fair knight, be ye a knight of Cornwall?"

"Wherefore askest thou that?" said Tristram.

"Truly, because it is full seldom seen," replied Sir Sagramour, "that
Cornish knights are valiant with their arms as with their tongues. It is
but two hours since there met us such a Cornish knight, who spoke great
words with might and prowess, but anon, with little mastery, he was laid
on earth, as I trow wilt thou be also."

"Fair lords," said Sir Tristram, "it may chance I be a better man than
he; but, be that as it may, he was my cousin, and for his sake I will
assail ye both; one Cornish knight against ye two."

When Sir Dodinas le Savage heard this speech, he caught at his spear and
said, "Sir knight, keep well thyself;" and then they parted and came
together as it had been thunder, and Sir Dodinas' spear split asunder;
but Sir Tristram smote him with so full a stroke as hurled him over his
horse's crupper, and nearly brake his neck. Sir Sagramour, seeing his
fellow's fall, marveled who this new knight be, and dressed his spear,
and came against Sir Tristram as a whirlwind; but Sir Tristram smote him
a mighty buffet, and rolled him with his horse down on the ground; and
in the falling he brake his thigh.

Then, looking at them both as they lay groveling on the grass, Sir
Tristram said, "Fair knights, will ye joust any more? Are there no
bigger knights in King Arthur's court? Will ye soon again speak shame of
Cornish knights?"

"Thou hast defeated us, in truth," replied Sir Sagramour, "and on the
faith of knighthood I require thee tell us thy right name?"

"Ye charge me by a great thing," said Sir Tristram, "and I will answer
ye."

And when they heard his name the two knights were right glad that they
had met Sir Tristram, for his deeds were known through all the land, and
they prayed him to abide in their company.

"Nay," said he, "I must find a fellow-knight of yours, Sir Bleoberis de
Ganis, whom I seek."

"God speed you well," said the two knights; and Sir Tristram rode away.

Soon he saw before him in a valley Sir Bleoberis with Sir Segwarides'
wife riding behind his squire upon a palfrey. At that he cried out
aloud, "Abide, Sir knight of King Arthur's court, bring back again that
lady or deliver her to me."

"I will not," said Bleoberis, "for I dread no Cornish knight."

"Why," said Sir Tristram, "may not a Cornish knight do well as any
other? This day, but three miles back, two knights of thy own court met
me, and found one Cornish knight enough for both before we parted."

"What were their names?" said Sir Bleoberis.

"Sir Sagramour le Desirous and Sir Dodinas le Savage," said Sir
Tristram.

"Ah," said Sir Bleoberis, amazed; "hast thou then met with them? By my
faith, they were two good knights and men of worship, and if thou hast
beat both thou must needs be a good knight; but for all that, thou shalt
beat me also ere thou hast this lady."

"Defend thee, then," cried out Sir Tristram, and came upon him swiftly
with his spear in rest. But Sir Bleoberis was as swift as he, and each
bore down the other, horse and all, on to the earth.

Then they sprang clear of their horses, and lashed together full eagerly
and mightily with their swords, tracing and traversing on the right hand
and on the left more than two hours, and sometimes rushing together with
such fury that they both lay groveling on the ground. At last Sir
Bleoberis started back and said, "Now, gentle knight, hold hard awhile,
and let us speak together."

"Say on," said Sir Tristram, "and I will answer thee."

"Sir," said Sir Bleoberis, "I would know thy name, and court, and
country."

"I have no shame to tell them," said Sir Tristram. "I am King Meliodas'
son, and my mother was sister to King Mark, from whose court I now come.
My name is Sir Tristram de Lyonesse."

"Truly," said Sir Bleoberis, "I am right glad to hear it, for thou art
he that slew Sir Marhaus hand-to-hand, fighting for the Cornish tribute;
and overcame Sir Palomedes at the great Irish tournament, where also
thou didst overthrow Sir Gawain and his nine companions."

"I am that knight," said Sir Tristram, "and now I pray thee tell me thy
name."

"I am Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, cousin of Sir Lancelot of the Lake, one of
the best knights in all the world," he answered.

"Thou sayest truth," said Sir Tristram; "for Sir Lancelot, as all men
know, is peerless in courtesy and knighthood, and for the great love I
bear to his name I will not willingly fight more with thee his
kinsman."

"In good faith, sir," said Sir Bleoberis, "I am as loth to fight thee
more; but since thou hast followed me to win this lady, I proffer thee
kindness, courtesy, and gentleness; this lady shall be free to go with
which of us she pleaseth best."

"I am content," said Sir Tristram, "for I doubt not she will come to
me."

"That shalt thou shortly prove," said he, and called his squire, and set
the lady in the midst between them, who forthwith walked to Sir
Bleoberis and elected to abide with him. Which, when Sir Tristram saw,
he was in wondrous anger with her, and felt that he could scarce for
shame return to King Mark's court. But Sir Bleoberis said, "Hearken to
me, good knight, Sir Tristram, because King Mark gave me free choice of
any gift, and because this lady chose to go with me, I took her; but now
I have fulfilled my quest and my adventure, and for thy sake she shall
be sent back to her husband at the abbey where he lieth."

So Sir Tristram rode back to Tintagil, and Sir Bleoberis to the abbey
where Sir Segwarides lay wounded, and there delivered up his lady, and
departed as a noble knight.

After this adventure Sir Tristram abode still at his uncle's court, till
in the envy of his heart King Mark devised a plan to be rid of him. So
on a certain day he desired him to depart again for Ireland, and there
demand La Belle Isault on his behalf, to be his queen--forever had Sir
Tristram praised her beauty and her goodness, till King Mark desired to
wed her for himself. Moreover, he believed his nephew surely would be
slain by the queen's kindred if he once were found again in Ireland.

But Sir Tristram, scorning fear, made ready to depart, and took with him
the noblest knights that could be found, arrayed in the richest fashion.

And when they were come to Ireland, upon a certain day Sir Tristram gave
his uncle's message, and King Anguish consented thereto.

But when La Belle Isault was told the tidings she was very sorrowful and
loth--yet made she ready to set forth with Sir Tristram, and took with
her Dame Bragwaine, her chief gentlewoman. Then the queen gave Dame
Bragwaine, and Governale, Sir Tristram's servant, a little flask, and
charged them that La Belle Isault and King Mark should both drink of it
on their marriage day, and then should they surely love each other all
their lives.

Anon, Sir Tristram and Isault, with a great company, took the sea and
departed. And so it chanced that one day sitting in their cabin they
were athirst, and saw a little flask of gold which seemed to hold good
wine. So Sir Tristram took it up, and said, "Fair lady, this looketh to
be the best of wines, and your maid, Dame Bragwaine, and my servant,
Governale, have kept it for themselves." Thereat they both laughed
merrily, and drank each after other from the flask, and never before had
they tasted any wine which seemed so good and sweet. But by the time
they had finished drinking they loved each other so well that their
love nevermore might leave them for weal or woe. And thus it came to
pass that though Sir Tristram might never wed La Belle Isault, he did
the mightiest deeds of arms for her sake only all his life.

Then they sailed onwards till they came to a castle called Pluere, where
they would have rested. But anon there ran forth a great company and
took them prisoners. And when they were in prison, Sir Tristram asked a
knight and lady whom they found therein wherefore they were so
shamefully dealt with; "for," said he, "it was never the custom of any
place of honor that I ever came unto to seize a knight and lady asking
shelter and thrust them into prison, and a full evil and discourteous
custom is it."

"Sir," said the knight, "know ye not that this is called the Castle
Pluere, or the weeping castle, and that it is an ancient custom here
that whatsoever knight abideth in it must needs fight the lord of it,
Sir Brewnor, and he that is the weakest shall lose his head. And if the
lady he hath with him be less fair than the lord's wife, she shall lose
her head; but if she be fairer, then must the lady of the castle lose
her head."

"Now Heaven help me," said Sir Tristram, "but this is a foul and
shameful custom. Yet have I one advantage, for my lady is the fairest
that doth live in all the world, so that I nothing fear for her; and as
for me, I will full gladly fight for my own head in a fair field."

Then said the knight, "Look ye be up betimes to-morrow, and make you
ready and your lady."

And on the morrow came Sir Brewnor to Sir Tristram, and put him and
Isault forth out of prison, and brought him a horse and armor, and bade
him make ready, for all the commons and estates of that lordship waited
in the field to see and judge the battle.

Then Sir Brewnor, holding his lady by the hand, all muffled, came forth,
and Sir Tristram went to meet him with La Belle Isault beside him,
muffled also. Then said Sir Brewnor, "Sir knight, if thy lady be fairer
than mine, with thy sword smite off my lady's head; but if my lady be
fairer than thine, with my sword I will smite off thy lady's head. And
if I overcome thee thy lady shall be mine, and thou shalt lose thy
head."

"Sir knight," replied Sir Tristram, "this is a right foul and felon
custom, and rather than my lady shall lose her head will I lose my own."

"Nay," said Sir Brewnor, "but the ladies shall be now compared together
and judgment shall be had."

"I consent not," cried Sir Tristram, "for who is here that will give
rightful judgment? Yet doubt not that my lady is far fairer than thine
own, and that will I prove and make good." Therewith Sir Tristram lifted
up the veil from off La Belle Isault, and stood beside her with his
naked sword drawn in his hand.

Then Sir Brewnor unmuffled his lady and did in like manner. But when he
saw La Belle Isault he knew that none could be so fair, and all there
present gave their judgment so. Then said Sir Tristram, "Because thou
and thy lady have long used this evil custom, and have slain many good
knights and ladies, it were a just thing to destroy thee both."

"In good sooth," said Sir Brewnor, "thy lady is fairer than mine, and of
all women I never saw any so fair. Therefore, slay my lady if thou wilt,
and I doubt not but I shall slay thee and have thine."

"Thou shalt win her," said Sir Tristram, "as dearly as ever knight won
lady; and because of thy own judgment and of the evil custom that thy
lady hath consented to, I will slay her as thou sayest."

And therewithal Sir Tristram went to him and took his lady from him, and
smote off her head at a stroke.

"Now take thy horse," cried out Sir Brewnor, "for since I have lost my
lady I will win thine and have thy life."

So they took their horses and came together as fast as they could fly,
and Sir Tristram lightly smote Sir Brewnor from his horse. But he rose
right quickly, and when Sir Tristram came again he thrust his horse
through both the shoulders, so that it reeled and fell. But Sir Tristram
was light and nimble, and voided his horse, and rose up and dressed his
shield before him, though meanwhile, ere he could draw out his sword,
Sir Brewnor gave him three or four grievous strokes. Then they rushed
furiously together like two wild boars, and fought hurtling and hewing
here and there for nigh two hours, and wounded each other full sorely.
Then at the last Sir Brewnor rushed upon Sir Tristram and took him in
his arms to throw him, for he trusted greatly in his strength. But Sir
Tristram was at that time called the strongest and biggest knight of the
world; for he was bigger than Sir Lancelot, though Sir Lancelot was
better breathed. So anon he thrust Sir Brewnor groveling to the earth,
and then unlaced his helm and struck off his head. Then all they that
belonged to the castle came and did him homage and fealty, and prayed
him to abide there for a season and put an end to that foul custom.

But within a while he departed and came to Cornwall, and there King Mark
was forthwith wedded to La Belle Isault with great joy and splendor.

And Sir Tristram had high honor, and ever lodged at the king's court.
But for all he had done him such services King Mark hated him, and on a
certain day he set two knights to fall upon him as he rode in the
forest. But Sir Tristram lightly smote one's head off, and sorely
wounded the other, and made him bear his fellow's body to the king. At
that the king dissembled and hid from Sir Tristram that the knights were
sent by him; yet more than ever he hated him in secret, and sought to
slay him.

So on a certain day, by the assent of Sir Andret, a false knight, and
forty other knights, Sir Tristram was taken prisoner in his sleep and
carried to a chapel on the rocks above the sea to be cast down. But as
they were about to cast him in, suddenly he brake his bonds asunder, and
rushing at Sir Andret, took his sword and smote him down therewith.
Then, leaping down the rocks where none could follow, he escaped them.
But one shot after him and wounded him full sorely with a poisoned arrow
in the arm.

Anon, his servant Governale, with Sir Lambegus, sought him and found him
safe among the rocks, and told him that King Mark had banished him and
all his followers to avenge Sir Andret's death. So they took ship and
came to Brittany.

Now Sir Tristram, suffering great anguish from his wound, was told to
seek Isoude, the daughter of the King of Brittany, for she alone could
cure such wounds. Wherefore he went to King Howell's court, and said,
"Lord, I am come into this country to have help from thy daughter, for
men tell me none but she may help me." And Isoude gladly offering to do
her best, within a month he was made whole.

While he abode still at that court, an earl named Grip made war upon
King Howell, and besieged him; and Sir Kay Hedius, the king's son, went
forth against him, but was beaten in battle and sore wounded. Then the
king praying Sir Tristram for his help, he took with him such knights as
he could find, and on the morrow, in another battle, did such deeds of
arms that all the land spake of him. For there he slew the earl with his
own hands, and more than a hundred knights besides.

When he came back King Howell met him, and saluted him with every honor
and rejoicing that could be thought of, and took him in his arms, and
said, "Sir Tristram, all my kingdom will I resign to thee."

"Nay," answered he, "God forbid, for truly am I beholden to you forever
for your daughter's sake."

Then the king prayed him to take Isoude in marriage, with a great dower
of lands and castles. To this Sir Tristram presently consenting anon
they were wedded at the court.

But within a while Sir Tristram greatly longed to see Cornwall, and Sir
Kay Hedius desired to go with him. So they took ship; but as soon as
they were at sea the wind blew them upon the coast of North Wales, nigh
to Castle Perilous, hard by a forest wherein were many strange
adventures ofttimes to be met. Then said Sir Tristram to Sir Kay Hedius,
"Let us prove some of them ere we depart." So they took their horses and
rode forth.

When they had ridden a mile or more, Sir Tristram spied a goodly knight
before him well armed, who sat by a clear fountain with a strong horse
near him, tied to an oak-tree. "Fair sir," said he, when they came near,
"ye seem to be a knight errant by your arms and harness, therefore make
ready now to joust with one of us, or both."

Thereat the knight spake not, but took his shield and buckled it round
his neck, and leaping on his horse caught a spear from his squire's
hand.

Then said Sir Kay Hedius to Sir Tristram, "Let me assay him."

"Do thy best," said he.

So the two knights met, and Sir Kay Hedius fell sorely wounded in the
breast.

"Thou hast well jousted," cried Sir Tristram to the knight; "now make
ready for me!"

"I am ready," answered he, and encountered him, and smote him so heavily
that he fell down from his horse. Whereat, being ashamed, he put his
shield before him, and drew his sword, crying to the strange knight to
do likewise. Then they fought on foot for well nigh two hours, till they
were both weary.

At last Sir Tristram said, "In all my life I never met a knight so
strong and well-breathed as ye be. It were a pity we should further hurt
each other. Hold thy hand, fair knight, and tell me thy name."

"That will I," answered he, "if thou wilt tell me thine."

"My name," said he, "is Sir Tristram of Lyonesse."

"And mine, Sir Lamoracke of Gaul."

Then both cried out together, "Well met;" and Sir Lamoracke said, "Sir
for your great renown, I will that ye have all the worship of this
battle, and therefore will I yield me unto you." And therewith he took
his sword by the point to yield him.

"Nay," said Sir Tristram, "ye shall not do so, for well I know ye do it
of courtesy, and not of dread." And therewith he offered his sword to
Sir Lamoracke, saying, "Sir, as an overcome knight, I yield me unto you
as unto the man of noblest powers I have ever met with."

"Hold," said Sir Lamoracke, "let us now swear together nevermore to
fight against each other."

Then did they swear as he said.

Then Sir Tristram returned to Sir Kay Hedius, and when he was whole of
his wounds, they departed together in a ship, and landed on the coast of
Cornwall. And when they came ashore, Sir Tristram eagerly sought news of
La Belle Isault. And one told him in mistake that she was dead. Whereat,
for sore and grievous sorrow, he fell down in a swoon, and so lay for
three days and nights.

When he awoke therefrom he was crazed, and ran into the forest and abode
there like a wild man many days; whereby he waxed lean and weak of body,
and would have died, but that a hermit laid some meat beside him as he
slept. Now in that forest was a giant named Tauleas, who, for fear of
Tristram, had hid himself within a castle, but when they told him he was
mad, came forth and went at large again. And on a certain day he saw a
knight of Cornwall, named Sir Dinaunt, pass by with a lady, and when he
had alighted by a well to rest, the giant leaped out from his ambush,
and took him by the throat to slay him. But Sir Tristram, as he wandered
through the forest, came upon them as they struggled; and when the
knight cried out for help, he rushed upon the giant, and taking up Sir
Dinaunt's sword, struck off therewith the giant's head, and straightway
disappeared among the trees.

Anon, Sir Dinaunt took the head of Tauleas, and bare it with him to the
court of King Mark, whither he was bound, and told of his adventures.
"Where had ye this adventure?" said King Mark.

"At a fair fountain in thy forest," answered he.

"I would fain see that wild man," said the king.

So within a day or two he commanded his knights to a great hunting in
the forest. And when the king came to the well, he saw a wild man lying
there asleep, having a sword beside him; but he knew not that it was Sir
Tristram. Then he blew his horn, and summoned all his knights to take
him gently up and bear him to the court.

And when they came thereto they bathed and washed him, and brought him
somewhat to his right mind. Now La Belle Isault knew not that Sir
Tristram was in Cornwall; but when she heard that a wild man had been
found in the forest, she came to see him. And so sorely was he changed,
she knew him not. "Yet," said she to Dame Bragwaine, "in good faith I
seem to have beheld him ofttimes before."

As she thus spoke a little hound, which Sir Tristram had given her when
she first came to Cornwall, and which was ever with her, saw Sir
Tristram lying there, and leapt upon him, licking his hands and face,
and whined and barked for joy.

"Alas," cried out La Belle Isault, "it is my own true knight, Sir
Tristram."

And at her voice Sir Tristram's senses wholly came again, and wellnigh
he wept for joy to see his lady living.

But never would the hound depart from Tristram; and when King Mark and
other knights came up to see him, it sat upon his body and bayed at all
who came too near. Then one of the knights said, "Surely this is Sir
Tristram; I see it by the hound."

"Nay," said the king, "it cannot be," and asked Sir Tristram on his
faith who he was.

"My name," said he, "is Sir Tristram of Lyonesse, and now ye may do what
ye list with me."

Then the king said, "It repents me that ye are recovered," and sought to
make his barons slay him. But most of them would not assent thereto, and
counseled him instead to banish Tristram for ten years again from
Cornwall, for returning without orders from the king. So he was sworn to
depart forthwith.

And as he went towards the ship a knight of King Arthur, named Sir
Dinadan, who sought him, came and said, "Fair knight, ere that you pass
out of this country, I pray you joust with me!"

"With a good will," said he.

Then they ran together, and Sir Tristram lightly smote him from his
horse. Anon he prayed Sir Tristram's leave to bear him company, and when
he had consented they rode together to the ship.

Then was Sir Tristram full of bitterness of heart, and said to all the
knights who took him to the shore, "Greet well King Mark and all mine
enemies from me, and tell them I will come again when I may. Well am I
now rewarded for slaying Sir Marhaus, and delivering this kingdom from
its bondage, and for the perils wherewithal I brought La Belle Isault
from Ireland to the king, and rescued her at the Castle Pluere, and for
the slaying of the giant Tauleas, and all the other deeds that I have
done for Cornwall and King Mark." Thus angrily and passing bitterly he
spake, and went his way.

And after sailing awhile the ship stayed at a landing-place upon the
coast of Wales; and there Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan alighted, and on
the shore they met two knights, Sir Ector and Sir Bors. And Sir Ector
encountered with Sir Dinadan and smote him to the ground; but Sir Bors
would not encounter with Sir Tristram, "For," said he, "no Cornish
knights are men of worship." Thereat Sir Tristram was full wroth, but
presently there met them two more knights, Sir Bleoberis and Sir Driant;
and Sir Bleoberis proffered to joust with Sir Tristram, who shortly
smote him down.

"I had not thought," cried out Sir Bors, "that any Cornish knight could
do so valiantly."

Then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan departed, and rode into a forest, and
as they rode a damsel met them, who for Sir Lancelot's sake was seeking
any noble knights to rescue him. For Queen Morgan le Fay, who hated him,
had ordered thirty men-at-arms to lie in ambush for him as he passed,
with the intent to kill him. So the damsel prayed them to rescue him.

Then said Sir Tristram, "Bring me to that place, fair damsel."

But Sir Dinadan cried out, "It is not possible for us to meet with
thirty knights! I will take no part in such a hardihood, for to match
one or two or three knights is enough; but to match fifteen I will
never assay."

"For shame," replied Sir Tristram, "do but your part."

"That will I not," said he; "wherefore, I pray ye, lend me your shield,
for it is of Cornwall, and because men of that country are deemed
cowards, ye are but little troubled as ye ride with knights to joust
with."

"Nay," said Sir Tristram, "I will never give my shield up for her sake
who gave it me; but if thou wilt not stand by me to-day I will surely
slay thee; for I ask no more of thee than to fight one knight, and if
thy heart will not serve thee that much, thou shalt stand by and look on
me and them."

"Would God that I had never met with ye!" cried Sir Dinadan; "but I
promise to look on and do all that I may to save myself."

Anon they came to where the thirty knights lay waiting, and Sir Tristram
rushed upon them, saying, "Here is one who fights for love of Lancelot!"
Then slew he two of them at the first onset with his spear, and ten more
swiftly after with his sword. At that Sir Dinadan took courage, and
assailed the others with him, till they turned and fled.

But Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode on till nightfall, and meeting
with a shepherd, asked him if he knew of any lodging thereabouts.

"Truly, fair lords," said he, "there is good lodging in a castle hard
by, but it is a custom there that none shall lodge therein save ye first
joust with two knights, and as soon as ye be within, ye shall find your
match."

"That is an evil lodging," said Sir Dinadan; "lodge where ye will, I
will not lodge there."

"Shame on thee!" said Sir Tristram; "art thou a knight at all?"

Then he required him on his knighthood to go with him, and they rode
together to the castle. As soon as they were near, two knights came out
and ran full speed against them; but both of them they overthrew, and
went within the castle, and had noble cheer. Now, when they were unarmed
and ready to take rest, there came to the castle-gate two knights, Sir
Palomedes and Sir Gaheris, and desired the custom of the castle.

"I would far rather rest than fight," said Sir Dinadan.

"That may not be," replied Sir Tristram, "for we must needs defend the
custom of the castle, seeing we have overcome its lords; therefore, make
ready."

"Alas that I ever came into your company," said Sir Dinadan.

So they made ready, and Sir Gaheris encountered Sir Tristram and fell
before him; but Sir Palomedes overthrew Sir Dinadan. Then would all
fight on foot save Sir Dinadan, for he was sorely bruised and frighted
by his fall. And when Sir Tristram prayed him to fight, "I will not,"
answered he, "for I was wounded by those thirty knights with whom we
fought this morning; and as to you, ye are in truth like one gone mad,
and who would cast himself away! There be but two knights in the world
so mad, and the other is Sir Lancelot, with whom I once rode forth, who
kept me evermore at battling so that for a quarter of a year thereafter
I lay in my bed. Heaven defend me again from either of your
fellowships!"

"Well," said Sir Tristram, "if it must be, I will fight them both."

Therewith he drew his sword and assailed Sir Palomedes and Sir Gaheris
together; but Sir Palomedes said, "Nay, but it is a shame for two to
fight with one." So he bade Sir Gaheris stand by, and he and Sir
Tristram fought long together; but in the end Sir Tristram drave him
backward, whereat Sir Gaheris and Sir Dinadan with one accord sundered
them. Then Sir Tristram prayed the two knights to lodge there; but
Dinadan departed and rode away into a priory hard by, and there he
lodged that night.

And on the morrow came Sir Tristram to the priory to find him, and
seeing him so weary that he could not ride, he left him, and departed.
At that same priory was lodged Sir Pellinore, who asked Sir Dinadan Sir
Tristram's name, but could not learn it, for Sir Tristram had charged
that he should remain unknown. Then said Sir Pellinore, "Since ye will
not tell it me, I will ride after him and find it myself."

"Beware, Sir knight," said Sir Dinadan, "ye will repent it if ye follow
him."

But Sir Pellinore straightway mounted and overtook him, and cried to him
to joust; whereat Sir Tristram forthwith turned and smote him down; and
wounded him full sorely in the shoulder.

On the day after, Sir Tristram met a herald, who told him of a
tournament proclaimed between King Carados of Scotland, and the King of
North Wales, to be held at the Maiden's Castle. Now King Carados sought
Sir Lancelot to fight there on his side, and the King of North Wales
sought Sir Tristram. And Sir Tristram purposed to be there. So as he
rode, he met Sir Key, the seneschal, and Sir Sagramour, and Sir Key
proffered to joust with him. But he refused, desiring to keep himself
unwearied for the tourney. Then Sir Key cried, "Sir knight of Cornwall,
joust with me, or yield as recreant." When Sir Tristram heard that, he
fiercely turned and set his spear in rest, and spurred his horse towards
him. But when Sir Key saw him so madly coming on, he in his turn
refused, whereat Sir Tristram called him coward, till for shame he was
compelled to meet him. Then Sir Tristram lightly smote him down, and
rode away. But Sir Sagramour pursued him, crying loudly to joust with
him also. So Sir Tristram turned and quickly overthrew him likewise, and
departed.

Anon a damsel met him as he rode, and told him of a knight adventurous
who did great harm thereby, and prayed him for his help. But as he went
with her he met Sir Gawain, who knew the damsel for a maiden of Queen
Morgan le Fay. Knowing, therefore, that she needs must have evil plots
against Sir Tristram, Sir Gawain demanded of him courteously whither he
went.

"I know not whither," said he, "save as this damsel leadeth me."

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "ye shall not ride with her, for she and her
lady never yet did good to any;" and, drawing his sword, he said to the
damsel, "Tell me now straightway for what cause thou leadest this
knight, or else shalt thou die; for I know of old thy lady's treason."

"Mercy, Sir Gawain," cried the damsel, "and I will tell thee all." Then
she told him that Queen Morgan had ordained thirty fair damsels to seek
out Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram, and by their wiles persuade them to
her castle, where she had thirty knights in wait to slay them.

"Oh shame!" cried Sir Gawain, "that ever such foul treason should be
wrought by a queen, and a king's sister." Then said he to Sir Tristram,
"Sir knight, if ye will stand with me, we will together prove the malice
of these thirty knights."

"I will not fail you," answered he, "for but few days since I had to do
with thirty knights of that same queen, and trust we may win honor as
lightly now as then."

So they rode together, and when they came to the castle, Sir Gawain
cried aloud, "Queen Morgan le Fay, send out thy knights that we may
fight with them."

Then the queen urged her knights to issue forth, but they durst not, for
they well knew Sir Tristram, and feared him greatly.

So Sir Tristram and Sir Gawain went on their way, and as they rode they
saw a knight, named Sir Brewse-without-pity, chasing a lady, with intent
to slay her. Then Sir Gawain prayed Sir Tristram to hold still and let
him assail that knight. So he rode up between Sir Brewse and the lady,
and cried, "False knight, turn thee to me and leave that lady." Then Sir
Brewse turned and set his spear in rest, and rushed against Sir Gawain
and overthrew him, and rode his horse upon him as he lay, which when Sir
Tristram saw, he cried, "Forbear that villainy," and galloped at him.
But when Sir Brewse saw by the shield it was Sir Tristram, he turned and
fled. And though Sir Tristram followed swiftly after him, yet he was so
well horsed that he escaped.

Anon Sir Tristram and Sir Gawain came nigh the Maiden's Castle, and
there an old knight named Sir Pellonnes gave them lodging. And Sir
Persides, the son of Sir Pellonnes, a good knight, came out to welcome
them. And, as they stood talking at a bay window of the castle, they saw
a goodly knight ride by on a black horse, and carrying a black shield.
"What knight is that?" asked Tristram.

"One of the best knights in all the world," said Sir Persides.

"Is he Sir Lancelot?" said Sir Tristram.

"Nay," answered Sir Persides, "it is Sir Palomedes, who is yet
unchristened."

Within a while one came and told them that a knight with a black shield
had smitten down thirteen knights. "Let us go and see this jousting,"
said Sir Tristram. So they armed themselves and went down. And when Sir
Palomedes saw Sir Persides, he sent a squire to him and proffered him to
joust. So they jousted, and Sir Persides was overthrown. Then Sir
Tristram made ready to joust, but ere he had his spear in rest, Sir
Palomedes took him at advantage, and struck him on the shield so that he
fell. At that Sir Tristram was wroth out of measure and sore ashamed,
wherefore he sent a squire and prayed Sir Palomedes to joust once again.
But he would not, saying, "Tell thy master to revenge himself to-morrow
at the Maiden's Castle, where he shall see me again."

So on the morrow Sir Tristram commanded his servant to give him a black
shield with no cognizance thereon, and he and Sir Persides rode into the
tournament and joined King Carados' side.

Then the knights of the King of North Wales came forth, and there was a
great fighting and breaking of spears, and overthrow of men and horses.

Now King Arthur sat above in a high gallery to see the tourney and give
the judgment, and Sir Lancelot sat beside him. Then came against Sir
Tristram and Sir Persides, two knights with them of North Wales, Sir
Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris; and Sir Persides was smitten down and nigh
slain, for four horsemen rode over him. But Sir Tristram rode against
Sir Gaheris and smote him from his horse, and when Sir Bleoberis next
encountered him, he overthrew him also. Anon they horsed themselves
again, and with them came Sir Dinadan, whom Sir Tristram forthwith smote
so sorely, that he reeled off his saddle. Then cried he, "Ah! Sir
knight, I know ye better than ye deem, and promise nevermore to come
against ye." Then rode Sir Bleoberis at him the second time, and had a
buffet that felled him to the earth. And soon thereafter the king
commanded to cease for that day, and all men marveled who Sir Tristram
was, for the prize of the first day was given him in the name of the
Knight of the Black Shield.

Now Sir Palomedes was on the side of the King of North Wales, but knew
not Sir Tristram again. And, when he saw his marvelous deeds, he sent to
ask his name. "As to that," said Sir Tristram, "he shall not know at
this time, but tell him he shall know when I have broken two spears upon
him, for I am the knight he smote down yesterday, and whatever side he
taketh, I will take the other."

So when they told him that Sir Palomedes would be on King Carados'
side--for he was kindred to King Arthur--"Then will I be on the King of
North Wales' side," said he, "but else would I be on my lord King
Arthur's."

Then on the morrow, when King Arthur was come, the heralds blew unto the
tourney. And King Carados jousted with the King of a Hundred Knights and
fell before him, and then came in King Arthur's knights and bare back
those of North Wales. But anon Sir Tristram came to aid them and bare
back the battle, and fought so mightily that none could stand against
him, for he smote down on the right and on the left, so that all the
knights and common people shouted his praise.

"Since I bare arms," said King Arthur, "never saw I a knight do more
marvelous deeds."

Then the King of the Hundred Knights and those of North Wales set upon
twenty knights who were of Sir Lancelot's kin, who fought all together,
none failing the others. When Sir Tristram beheld their nobleness and
valor, he marveled much. "Well may he be valiant and full of prowess,"
said he, "who hath such noble knights for kindred." So, when he had
looked on them awhile, he thought it shame to see two hundred men
assailing twenty, and riding to the King of a Hundred Knights, he said,
"I pray thee, Sir king, leave your fighting with those twenty knights,
for ye be too many and they be too few. For ye shall gain no honor if ye
win, and that I see verily ye will not do unless ye slay them; but if ye
will not stay, I will ride with them and help them."

"Nay," said the king, "ye shall not do so; for full gladly I will do
your courtesy," and with that he withdrew his knights.

Then Sir Tristram rode his way into the forest, that no man might know
him. And King Arthur caused the heralds to blow that the tourney should
end that day, and he gave the King of North Wales the prize, because Sir
Tristram was on his side. And in all the field there was such a cry that
the sound thereof was heard two miles away--"The knight with the black
shield hath won the field."

"Alas!" said King Arthur, "where is that knight? it is shame to let him
thus escape us." Then he comforted his knights, and said, "Be not
dismayed, my friends, howbeit ye have lost the day; be of good cheer;
to-morrow I myself will be in the field, and fare with you." So they all
rested that night.

And on the morrow the heralds blew unto the field. So the King of North
Wales and the King of a Hundred Knights encountered with King Carados
and the King of Ireland, and overthrew them. With that came King Arthur,
and did mighty deeds of arms, and overthrew the King of North Wales and
his fellows, and put twenty valiant knights to the worse. Anon came in
Sir Palomedes, and made great fight upon King Arthur's side. But Sir
Tristram rode furiously against him, and Sir Palomedes was thrown from
his horse. Then cried King Arthur, "Knight of the Black Shield, keep
thyself." And as he spake he came upon him, and smote him from his
saddle to the ground, and so passed on to other knights. Then Sir
Palomedes having now another horse rushed at Sir Tristram, as he was on
foot, thinking to run over him. But he was aware of him, and stepped
aside, and grasped Sir Palomedes by the arms, and pulled him off his
horse. Then they rushed together with their swords, and many stood still
to gaze on them. And Sir Tristram smote Sir Palomedes with three mighty
strokes upon the helm, crying at each stroke, "Take this for Sir
Tristram's sake," and with that Sir Palomedes fell to the earth.

Anon the King of North Wales brought Sir Tristram another horse, and Sir
Palomedes found one also. Then did they joust again with passing rage,
for both by now were like mad lions. But Sir Tristram avoided his spear,
and seized Sir Palomedes by the neck, and pulled him from his saddle,
and bore him onward ten spears' length, and so let him fall. Then King
Arthur drew forth his sword and smote the spear asunder, and gave Sir
Tristram two or three sore strokes ere he could get at his own sword.
But when he had it in his hand he mightily assailed the king. With that
eleven knights of Lancelot's kin went forth against him, but he smote
them all down to the earth, so that men marveled at his deeds.

And the cry was now so great that Sir Lancelot got a spear in his hand,
and came down to assay Sir Tristram, saying, "Knight with the black
shield, make ready." When Sir Tristram heard him he leveled his spear,
and both stooping their heads, they ran together mightily, as it had
been thunder. And Sir Tristram's spear brake short, but Sir Lancelot
struck him with a deep wound in the side and broke his spear, yet
overthrew him not. Therewith Sir Tristram, smarting at his wound, drew
forth his sword, and rushing at Sir Lancelot, gave him mighty strokes
upon the helm, so that the sparks flew from it, and Sir Lancelot stooped
his head down to the saddle-bow. But then Sir Tristram turned and left
the field, for he felt his wound so grievous that he deemed he should
soon die. Then did Sir Lancelot hold the field against all comers, and
put the King of North Wales and his party to the worse. And because he
was the last knight in the field the prize was given him.

But he refused to take it, and when the cry was raised, "Sir Lancelot
hath won the day," he cried out, "Nay, but Sir Tristram is the victor,
for he first began and last endured, and so hath he done each day." And
all men honored Lancelot more for his knightly words than if he had
taken the prize.

This was the tournament ended, and King Arthur departed to Caerleon, for
the Whitsun feast was now nigh come, and all the knights adventurous
went their ways. And many sought Sir Tristram in the forest whither he
had gone, and at last Sir Lancelot found him, and brought him to King
Arthur's court, as hath been told already.




SIR GALAHAD AND THE QUEST OF THE HOLY GRAIL




XIII