After these things Merlin fell into a dotage of love for a damsel of the
lady of the lake, and would let her have no rest, but followed her in
every place. And ever she encouraged him, and made him welcome till she
had learned all his crafts that she desired to know.

Then upon a time she went with him beyond the sea to the land of
Benwicke, and as they went he showed her many wonders, till at length
she was afraid, and would fain have been delivered from him.

And as they were in the forest of Broceliande, they sat together under
an oak-tree, and the damsel prayed to see all that charm whereby men
might be shut up yet alive in rocks or trees. But he refused her a long
time, fearing to let her know, yet in the end, her prayers and kisses
overcame him, and he told her all. Then did she make him great cheer,
but anon, as he lay down to sleep, she softly rose, and walked about him
waving her hands and muttering the charm, and presently enclosed him
fast within the tree whereby he slept. And therefrom nevermore he could
by any means come out for all the crafts that he could do. And so she
departed and left Merlin.

At the vigil of the next Feast of Pentecost, when all the Knights of the
Round Table were met together at Camelot, and had heard mass, and were
about to sit down to meat, there rode into the hall a fair lady on
horseback, who went straight up to King Arthur where he sat upon his
throne, and reverently saluted him.

"God be with thee, fair damsel," quoth the king; "what desirest thou of
me?"

"I pray thee tell me, lord," she answered, "where Sir Lancelot is."

"Yonder may ye see him," said King Arthur.

Then went she to Sir Lancelot and said, "Sir, I salute thee in King
Pelles' name, and require thee to come with me into the forest hereby."

Then asked he her with whom she dwelt, and what she wished of him.

"I dwell with King Pelles," said she, "whom Balin erst so sorely wounded
when he smote the dolorous stroke. It is he who hath sent me to call
thee."

"I will go with thee gladly," said Sir Lancelot, and bade his squire
straightway saddle his horse and bring his armor.

Then came the queen to him and said, "Sir Lancelot, will ye leave me
thus at this high feast?"

"Madam," replied the damsel, "by dinner-time to-morrow he shall be with
you."

"If I thought not," said the queen, "he should not go with thee by my
goodwill."

Then Sir Lancelot and the lady rode forth till they came to the forest,
and in a valley thereof found an abbey of nuns, whereby a squire stood
ready to open the gates. When they had entered, and descended from their
horses, a joyful crowd pressed round Sir Lancelot and heartily saluted
him, and led him to the abbess's chamber, and unarmed him. Anon he saw
his cousins likewise there, Sir Bors and Sir Lionel, who also made great
joy at seeing him, and said, "By what adventure art thou here, for we
thought to have seen thee at Camelot to-morrow?"

"A damsel brought me here," said he, "but as yet I know not for what
service."

As they thus talked twelve nuns came in, who brought with them a youth
so passing fair and well made, that in all the world his match could not
be found. His name was Galahad, and though he knew him not, nor Lancelot
him, Sir Lancelot was his father.

"Sir," said the nuns, "we bring thee here this child whom we have
nourished from his youth, and pray thee to make him a knight, for from
no worthier hand can he receive that order."

Then Sir Lancelot, looking on the youth, saw that he was seemly and
demure as a dove, with every feature good and noble, and thought he
never had beheld a better fashioned man of his years. "Cometh this
desire from himself?" said he.

"Yea," answered Galahad and all the nuns.

"To-morrow, then, in reverence for the feast, he shall have his wish,"
said Sir Lancelot.

And the next day at the hour of prime, he knighted him, and said, "God
make of thee as good a man as He hath made thee beautiful."

Then with Sir Lionel and Sir Bors he returned to the court, and found
all gone to the minster to hear service. When they came into the
banquet-hall each knight and baron found his name written in some seat
in letters of gold, as "here ought to sit Sir Lionel," "here ought to
sit Sir Gawain,"--and so forth. And in the Perilous Seat, at the high
center of the table, a name was also written, whereat they marveled
greatly, for no living man had ever yet dared sit upon that seat, save
one, and him a flame leaped forth and drew down under earth, so that he
was no more seen.

Then came Sir Lancelot and read the letters in that seat, and said, "My
counsel is that this inscription be now covered up until the knight be
come who shall achieve this great adventure." So they made a veil of
silk and put it over the letters.

In the meanwhile came Sir Gawain to the court and told the king he had a
message to him from beyond the sea, from Merlin.

"For," said he, "as I rode through the forest of Broceliande but five
days since, I heard the voice of Merlin speaking to me from the midst of
an oak-tree, whereat, in great amazement, I besought him to come forth.
But he, with many groans, replied he never more might do so, for that
none could free him, save the damsel of the Lake, who had enclosed him
there by his own spells which he had taught her. 'But go,' said he, 'to
King Arthur, and tell him, that he now prepare his knights and all his
Table Round to seek the Sangreal, for the time is come when it shall be
achieved.'"

When Sir Gawain had spoken thus, King Arthur sat pensive in spirit, and
mused deeply of the Holy Grail and what saintly knight should come who
might achieve it.

Anon he bade them hasten to set on the banquet. "Sir," said Sir Key, the
seneschal, "if we go now to meat ye will break the ancient custom of
your court, for never have ye dined at this high feast till ye have seen
some strange adventure."

"Thou sayest truly," said the king, "but my mind was full of wonders and
musings, till I bethought me not of mine old custom."

As they stood speaking thus, a squire ran in and cried, "Lord, I bring
thee marvelous tidings."

"What be they?" said King Arthur.

"Lord," said he, "hereby at the river is a marvelous great stone, which
I myself saw swim down hither-wards upon the water, and in it there is
set a sword, and ever the stone heaveth and swayeth on the water, but
floateth down no further with the stream."

"I will go and see it," said the king. So all the knights went with him,
and when they came to the river, there surely found they a mighty stone
of red marble floating on the water, as the squire had said, and
therein stuck a fair and rich sword, on the pommel whereof were precious
stones wrought skillfully with gold into these words: "No man shall take
me hence but he by whose side I should hang, and he shall be the best
knight in the world."

When the king read this, he turned round to Sir Lancelot, and said,
"Fair sir, this sword ought surely to be thine, for thou art the best
knight in all the world."

But Lancelot answered soberly, "Certainly, sir, it is not for me; nor
will I have the hardihood to set my hand upon it. For he that toucheth
it and faileth to achieve it shall one day be wounded by it mortally.
But I doubt not, lord, this day will show the greatest marvels that we
yet have seen, for now the time is fully come, as Merlin hath forewarned
us, when all the prophecies about the Sangreal shall be fulfilled."

Then stepped Sir Gawain forward and pulled at the sword, but could not
move it, and after him Sir Percival, to keep him fellowship in any peril
he might suffer. But no other knight durst be so hardy as to try.

"Now may ye go to your dinner," said Sir Key, "for a marvelous adventure
ye have had."

So all returned from the river, and every knight sat down in his own
place, and the high feast and banquet then was sumptuously begun, and
all the hall was full of laughter and loud talk and jests, and running
to and fro of squires who served their knights, and noise of jollity and
mirth.

Then suddenly befell a wondrous thing, for all the doors and windows of
the hall shut violently of themselves, and made thick darkness; and
presently there came a fair and gentle light from out the Perilous Seat,
and filled the palace with its beams. Then a dead silence fell on all
the knights, and each man anxiously beheld his neighbor.

But King Arthur rose and said, "Lords and fair knights, have ye no fear,
but rejoice; we have seen strange things to-day, but stranger yet
remain. For now I know we shall to-day see him who may sit in the Siege
Perilous, and shall achieve the Sangreal. For as ye all well know, that
holy vessel, wherefrom at the Supper of our Lord before His death He
drank the wine with His disciples, hath been held ever since the holiest
treasure of the world, and wheresoever it hath rested peace and
prosperity have rested with it on the land. But since the dolorous
stroke which Balin gave King Pelles none have seen it, for Heaven, wroth
with that presumptuous blow, hath hid it none know where. Yet somewhere
in the world it still may be, and may be it is left to us, and to this
noble order of the Table Round, to find and bring it home, and make of
this our realm the happiest in the earth. Many great quests and perilous
adventures have ye all taken and achieved, but this high quest he only
shall attain who hath clean hands and a pure heart, and valor and
hardihood beyond all other men."

While the king spoke there came in softly an old man robed all in white,
leading with him a young knight clad in red from top to toe, but without
armor or shield, and having by his side an empty scabbard.

The old man went up to the king, and said, "Lord, here I bring thee this
young knight of royal lineage, and of the blood of Joseph of Arimathea,
by whom the marvels of thy court shall fully be accomplished."

The king was right glad at his words, and said, "Sir, ye be right
heartily welcome, and the young knight also."

Then the old man put on Sir Galahad (for it was he) a crimson robe
trimmed with fine ermine, and took him by the hand and led him to the
Perilous Seat, and lifting up the silken cloth which hung upon it, read
these words written in gold letters, "This is the seat of Sir Galahad,
the good knight."

"Sir," said the old man, "this place is thine."

Then sat Sir Galahad down firmly and surely, and said to the old man,
"Sir, ye may now go your way, for ye have done well and truly all ye
were commanded, and commend me to my grandsire, King Pelles, and say
that I shall see him soon." So the old man departed with a retinue of
twenty noble squires.

But all the knights of the Round Table marveled at Sir Galahad, and at
his tender age, and at his sitting there so surely in the Perilous Seat.

Then the king led Sir Galahad forth from the palace, to show him the
adventure of the floating stone. "Here," said he, "is as great a marvel
as I ever saw, and right good knights have tried and failed to gain that
sword."

"I marvel not thereat," said Galahad, "for this adventure is not theirs,
but mine; and for the certainty I had thereof, I brought no sword with
me, as thou mayst see here by this empty scabbard."

Anon he laid his hand upon the sword, and lightly drew it from the
stone, and put it in his sheath, and said, "This sword was that
enchanted one which erst belonged to the good knight, Sir Balin,
wherewith he slew through piteous mistake his brother Balan; who also
slew him at the same time: all which great woe befell him through the
dolorous stroke he gave my grandsire, King Pelles, the wound whereof is
not yet whole, nor shall be till I heal him."

As he stood speaking thus, they saw a lady riding swiftly down the
river's bank towards them, on a white palfrey, who, saluting the king
and queen, said, "Lord king, Nacien the hermit sendeth thee word that to
thee shall come to-day the greatest honor and worship that hath yet ever
befallen a king of Britain; for this day shall the Sangreal appear in
thy house."

With that the damsel took her leave, and departed the same way she came.

"Now," said the king, "I know that from to-day the quest of the Sangreal
shall begin, and all ye of the Round Table will be scattered so that
nevermore shall I see ye again together as ye are now; let me then see a
joust and tournament amongst ye for the last time before ye go."

So they all took their harness and met together in the meadows by
Camelot, and the queen and all her ladies sat in a tower to see.

Then Sir Galahad, at the prayer of the king and queen, put on a coat of
light armor, and a helmet, but shield he would take none, and grasping a
lance, he drove into the middle of the press of knights, and began to
break spears marvelously, so that all men were full of wonder. And in so
short a time he had surmounted and exceeded the rest, save Sir Lancelot
and Sir Percival, that he took the chief worship of the field.

Then the king and all the court and fellowship of knights went back to
the palace, and so to evensong in the great minster, a royal and goodly
company, and after that sat down to supper in the hall, every knight in
his own seat, as they had been before.

Anon suddenly burst overhead the cracking and crying of great peals of
thunder, till the palace walls were shaken sorely, and they thought to
see them riven all to pieces.

And in the midst of the blast there entered in a sunbeam, clearer by
seven times than ever they saw day, and a marvelous great glory fell
upon them all. Then each knight, looking on his neighbor, found his face
fairer than he had ever seen, and so--all standing on their feet--they
gazed as dumb men on each other, not knowing what to say.

Then entered into the hall the Sangreal, borne aloft without hands
through the midst of the sunbeam, and covered with white samite, so that
none might see it. And all the hall was filled with perfume and incense,
and every knight was fed with the food he best loved. And when the holy
vessel had been thus borne through the hall, it suddenly departed, no
man saw whither.

When they recovered breath to speak, King Arthur first rose up, and
yielded thanks to God and to our Lord.

Then Sir Gawain sprang up and said, "Now have we all been fed by miracle
with whatsoever food we thought of or desired; but with our eyes we have
not seen the blessed vessel whence it came, so carefully and preciously
it was concealed. Therefore, I make a vow, that from to-morrow I shall
labor twelve months and a day in quest of the Sangreal, and longer if
need be; nor will I come again into this court until mine eyes have seen
it evidently."

When he had spoken thus, knight after knight rose up and vowed himself
to the same quest, till the most part of the Round Table had thus sworn.

But when King Arthur heard them all, he could not refrain his eyes from
tears, and said, "Sir Gawain, Sir Gawain, thou hast set me in great
sorrow, for I fear me my true fellowship shall never meet together here
again; and surely never Christian king had such a company of worthy
knights around his table at one time."

And when the queen and her ladies and gentlewomen heard the vows, they
had such grief and sorrow as no tongue could tell; and Queen Guinevere
cried out, "I marvel that my lord will suffer them to depart from him."
And many of the ladies who loved knights would have gone with them, but
were forbidden by the hermit Nacien, who sent this message to all who
had sworn themselves to the quest: "Take with ye no lady nor
gentlewoman, for into so high a service as ye go in, no thought but of
our Lord and heaven may enter."

On the morrow morning all the knights rose early, and when they were
fully armed, save shields and helms, they went in with the king and
queen to service in the minster. Then the king counted all who had taken
the adventure on themselves, and found them a hundred and fifty knights
of the Round Table; and so they all put on their helms, and rode away
together in the midst of cries and lamentations from the court, and from
the ladies, and from all the town.

But the queen went alone to her chamber, that no man might see her
sorrow; and Sir Lancelot followed her to say farewell.

When she saw him she cried out, "Oh, Sir Lancelot, thou hast betrayed
me; thou hast put me to death thus to depart and leave my lord the
king."

"Ah, madam," said he, "be not displeased or angry, for I shall come
again as soon as I can with honor."

"Alas!" said she, "that ever I saw thee; but He that suffered death upon
the cross for all mankind be to thee safety and good conduct, and to all
thy company."

Then Sir Lancelot saluted her and the king, and went forth with the
rest, and came with them that night to Castle Vagon, where they abode,
and on the morrow they departed from each other on their separate ways,
every knight taking the way that pleased him best.

Now Sir Galahad went forth without a shield, and rode so four days
without adventure; and on the fourth day, after evensong, he came to an
abbey of white monks, where he was received in the house, and led into a
chamber. And there he was unarmed, and met two knights of the Round
Table, King Bagdemagus, and Sir Uwaine.

"Sirs," said Sir Galahad, "what adventure hath brought ye here?"

"Within this place, as we are told," they answered, "there is a shield
no man may bear around his neck without receiving sore mischance, or
death within three days."

"To-morrow," said King Bagdemagus, "I shall attempt the adventure; and
if I fail, do thou, Sir Galahad, take it up after me."

"I will willingly," said he; "for as ye see I have no shield as yet."

So on the morrow they arose and heard mass, and afterwards King
Bagdemagus asked where the shield was kept. Then a monk led him behind
the altar, where the shield hung, as white as any snow, and with a
blood-red cross in the midst of it.

"Sir," said the monk, "this shield should hang from no knight's neck
unless he be the worthiest in the world. I warn ye, therefore, knights;
consider well before ye dare to touch it."

"Well," said King Bagdemagus, "I know well that I am far from the best
knight in all the world, yet shall I make the trial"; and so he took the
shield, and bore it from the monastery.

"If it please thee," said he to Sir Galahad, "abide here till thou
hearest how I speed."

"I will abide thee," said he.

Then taking with him a squire who might return with any tidings to Sir
Galahad, the king rode forth; and before he had gone two miles, he saw
in a fair valley a hermitage, and a knight who came forth dressed in
white armor, horse and all, who rode fast against him. When they
encountered, Bagdemagus brake his spear upon the White Knight's shield,
but was himself struck through the shoulder with a sore wound, and
hurled down from his horse. Then the White Knight alighting, came and
took the white shield from the king, and said, "Thou hast done great
folly, for this shield ought never to be borne but by one who hath no
living peer." And turning to the squire, he said, "Bear thou this shield
to the good knight, Sir Galahad, and greet him well from me."

"In whose name shall I greet him?" said the squire.

"Take thou no heed of that," he answered; "it is not for thee or any
earthly man to know."

"Now tell me, fair sir, at the least," said the squire, "why may this
shield be never borne except its wearer come to injury or death?"

"Because it shall belong to no man save its rightful owner, Galahad,"
replied the knight.

Then the squire went to his master, and found him wounded nigh to
death, wherefore he fetched his horse, and bore him back with him to the
abbey. And there they laid him in a bed, and looked to his wounds; and
when he had lain many days grievously sick, he at the last barely
escaped with his life.

"Sir Galahad," said the squire, "the knight who overthrew King
Bagdemagus sent you greeting, and bade you bear this shield."

"Now blessed be God and fortune," said Sir Galahad, and hung the shield
about his neck, and armed him, and rode forth.

Anon he met the White Knight by the hermitage, and each saluted
courteously the other.

"Sir," said Sir Galahad, "this shield I bear hath surely a full
marvelous history."

"Thou sayest rightly," answered he. "That shield was made in the days of
Joseph of Arimathea, the gentle knight who took our Lord down from the
cross. He, when he left Jerusalem with his kindred, came to the country
of King Evelake, who warred continually with one Tollome; and when, by
the teaching of Joseph, King Evelake became a Christian, this shield was
made for him in our Lord's name; and through its aid King Tollome was
defeated. For when King Evelake met him next in battle, he hid it in a
veil, and suddenly uncovering it, he showed his enemies the figure of a
bleeding man nailed to a cross, at sight of which they were discomfited
and fled. Presently after that, a man whose hand was smitten off touched
the cross upon the shield, and had his hand restored to him; and many
other miracles it worked. But suddenly the cross that was upon it
vanished away. Anon both Joseph and King Evelake came to Britain, and by
the preaching of Joseph the people were made Christians. And when at
length he lay upon his death-bed, King Evelake begged of him some token
ere he died. Then, calling for his shield, he dipped his finger in his
own blood, for he was bleeding fast, and none could staunch the wound,
and marked that cross upon it, saying, 'This cross shall ever show as
bright as now, and the last of my lineage shall wear this shield about
his neck, and go forth to all the marvelous deeds he will achieve.'"

When the White Knight had thus spoken he vanished suddenly away, and Sir
Galahad returned to the abbey.

As he alighted, came a monk, and prayed him to go see a tomb in the
churchyard, wherefrom came such a great and hideous noise, that none
could hear it but they went nigh mad, or lost all strength. "And, sir,"
said he, "I deem it is a fiend."

"Lead me thither," said Sir Galahad.

When they were come near the place, "Now," said the monk, "go thou to
the tomb, and lift it up."

And Galahad, nothing afraid, quickly lifted up the stone, and forthwith
came out a foul smoke, and from the midst thereof leaped up the
loathliest figure that ever he had seen in the likeness of man; and
Galahad blessed himself, for he knew it was a fiend of hell. Then he
heard a voice crying out, "Oh, Galahad, I cannot tear thee as I would; I
see so many angels round thee, that I may not come at thee."

Then the fiend suddenly disappeared with a marvelous great cry; and Sir
Galahad, looking in the tomb, saw there a body all armed, with a sword
beside it. "Now, fair brother," said he to the monk, "let us remove this
cursed body, which is not fit to lie in a churchyard, for when it lived,
a false and perjured Christian man dwelt in it. Cast it away, and there
shall come no more hideous noises from the tomb."

"And now must I depart," he added, "for I have much in hand, and am upon
the holy quest of the Sangreal, with many more good knights."

So he took his leave, and rode many journeys backwards and forwards as
adventure would lead him; and at last one day he departed from a castle
without first hearing mass, which was it ever his custom to hear before
he left his lodging. Anon he found a ruined chapel on a mountain, and
went in and kneeled before the altar, and prayed for wholesome counsel
what to do; and as he prayed he heard a voice, which said, "Depart,
adventurous knight, unto the Maiden's Castle, and redress the violence
and wrongs there done!"

Hearing these words he cheerfully arose, and mounted his horse, and rode
but half a mile, when he saw before him a strong castle, with deep
ditches round it, and a fair river running past. And seeing an old churl
hard by, he asked him what men called that castle.

"Fair sir," said he, "it is the Maiden's Castle."

"It is a cursed place," said Galahad, "and all its masters are but
felons, full of mischief and hardness and shame."

"For that good reason," said the old man, "thou wert well-advised to
turn thee back."

"For that same reason," quoth Sir Galahad, "will I the more certainly
ride on."

Then, looking at his armor carefully, to see that nothing failed him, he
went forward, and presently there met him seven damsels, who cried out,
"Sir knight, thou ridest in great peril, for thou hast two waters to
pass over."

"Why should I not pass over them?" said he, and rode straight on.

Anon he met a squire, who said, "Sir knight, the masters of this castle
defy thee, and bid thee go no further, till thou showest them thy
business here."

"Fair fellow," said Sir Galahad, "I am come here to destroy their wicked
customs."

"If that be thy purpose," answered he, "thou wilt have much to do."

"Go thou," said Galahad, "and hasten with my message."

In a few minutes after rode forth furiously from the gateways of the
castle seven knights, all brothers, and crying out, "Knight, keep thee,"
bore down all at once upon Sir Galahad. But thrusting forth his spear,
he smote the foremost to the earth, so that his neck was almost broken,
and warded with his shield the spears of all the others, which every one
brake off from it, and shivered into pieces. Then he drew out his sword,
and set upon them hard and fiercely, and by his wondrous force drave
them before him, and chased them to the castle gate, and there he slew
them.

At that came out to him an ancient man, in priest's vestments, saying,
"Behold, sir, here, the keys of this castle."

Then he unlocked the gates, and found within a multitude of people, who
cried out, "Sir knight, ye be welcome, for long have we waited thy
deliverance," and told him that the seven felons he had slain had long
enslaved the people round about, and killed all knights who passed that
way, because the maiden whom they had robbed of the castle had foretold
that by one knight they should themselves be overthrown.

"Where is the maiden?" asked Sir Galahad.

"She lingereth below in a dungeon," said they.

So Sir Galahad went down and released her, and restored her her
inheritance; and when he had summoned the barons of the country to do
her homage, he took his leave, and departed.

Presently thereafter, as he rode, he entered a great forest, and in a
glade thereof met two knights, disguised, who proffered him to joust.
These were Sir Lancelot, his father, and Sir Percival, but neither knew
the other. So he and Sir Lancelot encountered first, and Sir Galahad
smote down his father. Then drawing his sword, for his spear was broken,
he fought with Sir Percival, and struck so mightily that he clave Sir
Percival's helm, and smote him from his horse.

Now hard by where they fought there was a hermitage, where dwelt a pious
woman, a recluse, who, when she heard the sound, came forth, and seeing
Sir Galahad ride, she cried, "God be with thee, the best knight in the
world; had yonder knights known thee as well as I do, they would not
have encountered with thee."

When Sir Galahad heard that, fearing to be made known, he forthwith
smote his horse with his spurs, and departed at a great pace.

Sir Lancelot and Sir Percival heard her words also, and rode fast after
him, but within a while he was out of their sight. Then Sir Percival
rode back to ask his name of the recluse; but Sir Lancelot went forward
on his quest, and following any path his horse would take, he came
by-and-by after nightfall to a stone cross hard by an ancient chapel.
When he had alighted and tied his horse up to a tree, he went and looked
in through the chapel door, which was all ruinous and wasted, and there
within he saw an altar, richly decked with silk, whereon there stood a
fair candlestick of silver, bearing six great lights. And when Sir
Lancelot saw the light, he tried to get within the chapel, but could
find no place. So, being passing weary and heavy, he came again to his
horse, and when he had unsaddled him, and set him free to pasture, he
unlaced his helm, and ungirded his sword, and laid him down to sleep
upon his shield before the cross.

And while he lay between waking and sleeping, he saw come by him two
white palfreys bearing a litter, wherein a sick knight lay, and the
palfreys stood still by the cross. Then Sir Lancelot heard the sick man
say, "O sweet Lord, when shall this sorrow leave me, and the holy
vessel pass by me, wherethrough I shall be blessed? for I have long
endured."

With that Sir Lancelot saw the chapel open, and the candlestick with the
six tapers come before the cross, but he could see none who bare it.
Then came there also a table of silver, and thereon the holy vessel of
the Sangreal. And when the sick knight saw that, he sat up, and lifting
both his hands, said, "Fair Lord, sweet Lord, who art here within this
holy vessel, have mercy on me, that I may be whole"; and therewith he
crept upon his hands and knees so nigh, that he might touch the vessel;
and when he had kissed it, he leaped up, and stood and cried aloud,
"Lord God, I thank Thee, for I am made whole." Then the Holy Grail
departed with the table and the silver candlestick into the chapel, so
that Sir Lancelot saw it no more, nor for his sins' sake could he follow
it. And the knight who was healed went on his way.

Then Sir Lancelot awake, and marveled whether he had seen aught but a
dream. And as he marveled, he heard a voice saying, "Sir Lancelot, thou
art unworthy, go thou hence, and withdraw thee from this holy place."
And when he heard that, he was passing heavy, for he bethought him of
his sins.

So he departed weeping, and cursed the day of his birth, for the words
went into his heart, and he knew wherefore he was thus driven forth.
Then he went to seek his arms and horse, but could not find them; and
then he called himself the wretchedest and most unhappy of all knights,
and said, "My sin hath brought me unto great dishonor: for when I
sought earthly honors, I achieved them ever; but now I take upon me holy
things, my guilt doth hinder me, and shameth me; therefore had I no
power to stir or speak when the holy blood appeared before me."

So thus he sorrowed till it was day, and he heard the birds sing; then
was he somewhat comforted, and departing from the cross on foot, he came
into a wild forest, and to a high mountain, and there he found a
hermitage; and, kneeling before the hermit down upon both his knees, he
cried for mercy for his wicked works, and prayed him to hear his
confession. But when he told his name, the hermit marveled to see him in
so sore a case, and said, "Sir, ye ought to thank God more than any
knight living, for He hath given thee more honor than any; yet for thy
presumption, while in deadly sin to come into the presence of His flesh
and blood, He suffered thee neither to see nor follow it. Wherefore,
believe that all thy strength and manhood will avail thee little, when
God is against thee."

Then Sir Lancelot wept and said, "Now know I well ye tell me truth."

Then he confessed to him, and told him all his sins, and how he had for
fourteen years served but Queen Guinevere only, and forgotten God, and
done great deeds of arms for her, and not for Heaven, and had little or
nothing thanked God for the honor that he won. And then Sir Lancelot
said, "I pray you counsel me."

"I will counsel thee," said he: "never more enter into that queen's
company when ye can avoid it."

So Sir Lancelot promised him.

"Look that your heart and your mouth accord," said the good man, "and ye
shall have more honor and more nobleness than ever ye have had."

Then were his arms and horse restored to him, and so he took his leave,
and rode forth, repenting greatly.

Now Sir Percival had ridden back to the recluse, to learn who that
knight was whom she had called the best in the world. And when he had
told her that he was Sir Percival, she made passing great joy of him,
for she was his mother's sister, wherefore she opened her door to him,
and made him good cheer. And on the morrow she told him of her kindred
to him, and they both made great rejoicing. Then he asked her who that
knight was, and she told him, "He it is who on Whit Sunday last was clad
in the red robe, and bare the red arms; and he hath no peer, for he
worketh all by miracle, and shall be never overcome by any earthly
hands."

"By my goodwill," said Sir Percival, "I will never after these tidings
have to do with Sir Galahad but in the way of kindness; and I would fain
learn where I may find him."

"Fair nephew," said she, "ye must ride to the Castle of Goth, where he
hath a cousin; by him ye may be lodged, and he will teach you the way to
go; but if he can tell you no tidings, ride straight to the Castle of
Carbonek, where the wounded king is lying, for there shall ye surely
hear true tidings of him."

So Sir Percival departed from his aunt, and rode till evensong time,
when he was ware of a monastery closed round with walls and deep
ditches, where he knocked at the gate, and anon was let in. And there he
had good cheer that night, and on the morrow heard mass. And beside the
altar where the priest stood, was a rich bed of silk and cloth of gold;
and on the bed there lay a man passing old, having a crown of gold upon
his head, and all his body was full of great wounds, and his eyes almost
wholly blind; and ever he held up his hands and said, "Sweet Lord,
forget not me!"

Then Sir Percival asked one of the brethren who he was.

"Sir," said the good man, "ye have heard of Joseph of Arimathea, how he
was sent of Jesus Christ into this land to preach and teach the
Christian faith. Now, in the city of Sarras he converted a king named
Evelake, and this is he. He came with Joseph to this land, and ever
desired greatly to see the Sangreal; so on a time he came nigh thereto,
and was struck almost blind. Then he cried out for mercy, and said,
'Fair Lord, I pray thee let me never die until a good knight of my blood
achieve the Sangreal, and I may see and kiss him.' When he had thus
prayed, he heard a voice that said, 'Thy prayers be heard and answered,
for thou shalt not die till that knight kiss thee; and when he cometh
shall thine eyes be opened and thy wounds be healed.' And now hath he
lived here for three hundred winters in a holy life, and men say a
certain knight of King Arthur's court shall shortly heal him."

Thereat Sir Percival marveled greatly, for he well knew who that knight
should be; and so, taking his leave of the monk, departed.

Then he rode on till noon, and came into a valley where he met twenty
men-at-arms bearing a dead knight on a bier. And they cried to him,
"Whence comest thou?"

"From King Arthur's court," he answered.

Then they all cried together, "Slay him," and set upon him.

But he smote down the first man to the ground, and his horse upon him;
whereat seven of them all at once assailed him, and others slew his
horse. Thus he had been either taken or slain, but by good chance Sir
Galahad was passing by that way, who, seeing twenty men attacking one,
cried, "Slay him not," and rushed upon them; and, as fast as his horse
could drive, he encountered with the foremost man, and smote him down.
Then, his spear being broken, he drew forth his sword and struck out on
the right hand and on the left, at each blow smiting down a man, till
the remainder fled, and he pursued them.

Then Sir Percival, knowing that it was Sir Galahad, would fain have
overtaken him, but could not, for his horse was slain. Yet followed he
on foot as fast as he could go; and as he went there met him a yeoman
riding on a palfrey, and leading in his hand a great black steed. So Sir
Percival prayed him to lend him the steed, that he might overtake Sir
Galahad. But he replied, "That can I not do, fair sir, for the horse is
my master's, and should I lend it he would slay me." So he departed, and
Sir Percival sat down beneath a tree in heaviness of heart. And as he
sat, anon a knight went riding past on the black steed which the yeoman
had led. And presently after came the yeoman back in haste, and asked
Sir Percival if he had seen a knight riding his horse.

"Yea," said Sir Percival.

"Alas," said the yeoman, "he hath reft him from me by strength, and my
master will slay me."

Then he besought Sir Percival to take his hackney and follow, and get
back his steed. So he rode quickly, and overtook the knight, and cried,
"Knight, turn again." Whereat he turned and set his spear, and smote Sir
Percival's hackney in the breast, so that it fell dead, and then went on
his way. Then cried Sir Percival after him, "Turn now, false knight, and
fight with me on foot"; but he would not, and rode out of sight.

Then was Sir Percival passing wroth and heavy of heart, and lay down to
rest beneath a tree, and slept till midnight. When he awoke he saw a
woman standing by him, who said to him right fiercely, "Sir Percival,
what doest thou here?"

"I do neither good nor evil," said he.

"If thou wilt promise me," said she, "to do my will whenever I shall ask
thee, I will bring thee here a horse that will bear thee wheresoever
thou desirest."

At that he was full glad, and promised as she asked. Then anon she came
again, with a great black steed, strong and well appareled. So Sir
Percival mounted, and rode through the clear moonlight, and within less
than an hour had gone a four days' journey, till he came to a rough
water that roared; and his horse would have borne him into it, but Sir
Percival would not suffer him, yet could he scarce restrain him. And
seeing the water so furious, he made the sign of the cross upon his
forehead, whereat the horse suddenly shook him off, and with a terrible
sound leaped into the water and disappeared, the waves all burning up in
flames around him. Then Sir Percival knew it was a fiend which had
brought him the horse; so he commended himself to God, and prayed that
he might escape temptations, and continued in prayer till it was day.

Then he saw that he was on a wild mountain, nigh surrounded on all sides
by the sea, and filled with wild beasts; and going on into a valley, he
saw a serpent carrying a young lion by the neck. With that came another
lion, crying and roaring after the serpent, and anon overtook him, and
began to battle with him. And Sir Percival helped the lion, and drew his
sword, and gave the serpent such a stroke that it fell dead. Thereat the
lion fawned upon him like a dog, licking his hands, and crouching at his
feet, and at night lay down by him and slept at his side.

And at noon the next day Sir Percival saw a ship come sailing before a
strong wind upon the sea towards him, and he rose and went towards it.
And when it came to shore, he found it covered with white samite, and on
the deck there stood an old man dressed in priest's robes, who said,
"God be with you, fair sir; whence come ye?"

"I am a knight of King Arthur's court," said he, "and follow the quest
of the Sangreal; but here have I lost myself in this wilderness."

"Fear nothing," said the old man, "for I have come from a strange
country to comfort thee."

Then he told Sir Percival it was a fiend of hell upon which he had
ridden to the sea, and that the lion, whom he had delivered from the
serpent, meant the Church. And Sir Percival rejoiced at these tidings,
and entered into the ship, which presently sailed from the shore into
the sea.

Now when Sir Bors rode forth from Camelot to seek the Sangreal, anon he
met a holy man riding on an ass, and courteously saluted him.

"Who are ye, son?" said the good man.

"I am a knight," said he, "in quest of the Sangreal, and would fain have
thy counsel, for he shall have much earthly honor who may bring it to a
favorable end."

"That is truth," said the good man, "for he shall be the best knight of
the world; yet know that none shall gain it save by sinless living."

So they rode to his hermitage together, and there he prayed Sir Bors to
abide that night, and anon they went into the chapel, and Sir Bors was
confessed. And they eat bread and drank water together.

"Now," said the hermit, "I pray thee eat no other food till thou sit at
the table where the Sangreal shall be." Thereto Sir Bors agreed.

"Also," said the hermit, "it were wise that ye should wear a sackcloth
garment next your skin, for penance"; and in this also did Sir Bors as
he was counseled. And afterwards he armed himself and took his leave.

Then rode he onwards all that day, and as he rode he saw a passing great
bird sit in an old dry tree, whereon no leaves were left; and many
little birds lay round the great one, nigh dead with hunger. Then did
the big bird smite himself with his own bill, and bled till he died
amongst his little ones, and they recovered life in drinking up his
blood. When Sir Bors saw this he knew it was a token, and rode on full
of thought. And about eventide he came to a tower, whereto he prayed
admission, and he was received gladly by the lady of the castle. But
when a supper of many meats and dainties was set before him, he
remembered his vow, and bade a squire to bring him water, and therein he
dipped his bread, and ate.

Then said the lady, "Sir Bors, I fear ye like not my meat."

"Yea, truly," said he; "God thank thee, madam; but I may eat no other
meat this day."

After supper came a squire, and said, "Madam, bethink thee to provide a
champion for thee to-morrow for the tourney, or else shall thy sister
have thy castle."

At that the lady wept, and made great sorrow. But Sir Bors prayed her to
be comforted, and asked her why the tournament was held. Then she told
him how she and her sister were the daughters of King Anianse, who left
them all his lands between them; and how her sister was the wife of a
strong knight, named Sir Pridan le Noir, who had taken from herself all
her lands, save the one tower wherein she dwelt. "And now," said she,
"this also will they take, unless I find a champion by to-morrow."

Then said Sir Bors, "Be comforted; to-morrow I will fight for thee";
whereat she rejoiced not a little, and sent word to Sir Pridan that she
was provided and ready. And Sir Bors lay on the floor, and in no bed,
nor ever would do otherwise till he had achieved his quest.

On the morrow he arose and clothed himself, and went into the chapel,
where the lady met him, and they heard mass together. Anon he called for
his armor, and went with a goodly company of knights to the battle. And
the lady prayed him to refresh himself ere he should fight, but he
refused to break his fast until the tournament were done. So they all
rode together to the lists, and there they saw the lady's eldest sister,
and her husband, Sir Pridan le Noir. And a cry was made by the heralds
that, whichever should win, his lady should have all the other's lands.

Then the two knights departed asunder a little space, and came together
with such force, that both their spears were shivered, and their shields
and hauberks pierced through; and both fell to the ground sorely
wounded, with their horses under them. But swiftly they arose, and drew
their swords, and smote each other on the head with many great and
heavy blows, till the blood ran down their bodies; and Sir Pridan was a
full good knight, so that Sir Bors had more ado than he had thought for
to overcome him.

But at last Sir Pridan grew a little faint; that instantly perceived Sir
Bors, and rushed upon him the more vehemently, and smote him fiercely,
till he rent off his helm, and then gave him great strokes upon his
visage with the flat of his sword, and bade him yield or be slain.

And then Sir Pridan cried him mercy, and said, "For God's sake slay me
not, and I will never war against thy lady more." So Sir Bors let him
go, and his wife fled away with all her knights.

Then all those who had held lands of the lady of the tower came and did
homage to her again, and swore fealty. And when the country was at peace
Sir Bors departed, and rode forth into a forest until it was midday, and
there befell him a marvelous adventure.

For at a place where two ways parted, there met him two knights, bearing
Sir Lionel, his brother, all naked, bound on a horse, and as they rode,
they beat him sorely with thorns, so that the blood trailed down in more
than a hundred places from his body; but for all this he uttered no word
or groan, so great he was of heart. As soon as Sir Bors knew his
brother, he put his spear in rest to run and rescue him; but in the same
moment heard a woman's voice cry close beside him in the wood, "St.
Mary, succor thy maid"; and, looking round, he saw a damsel whom a felon
knight dragged after him into the thickets; and she, perceiving him,
cried piteously for help, and adjured him to deliver her as he was a
sworn knight. Then was Sir Bors sore troubled, and knew not what to do,
for he thought within himself, "If I let my brother be, he will be
murdered; but if I help not the maid, she is shamed forever, and my vow
compelleth me to set her free; wherefore must I first help her, and
trust my brother unto God."

So, riding to the knight who held the damsel, he cried out, "Sir knight,
lay your hand off that maid, or else ye be but dead."

At that the knight set down the maid, and dropped his shield, and drew
forth his sword against Sir Bors, who ran at him, and smote him through
both shield and shoulder, and threw him to the earth; and when he pulled
his spear forth, the knight swooned. Then the maid thanked Sir Bors
heartily, and he set her on the knight's horse, and brought her to her
men-at-arms, who presently came riding after her. And they made much
joy, and besought him to come to her father, a great lord, and he should
be right welcome. But "truly," said he, "I may not at this time, for I
have a great adventure yet to do"; and commending them to God, he
departed in great haste to find his brother.

So he rode, seeking him by the track of the horses a great while. Anon
he met a seeming holy man riding upon a strong black horse, and asked
him, had he seen pass by that way a knight led bound and beaten with
thorns by two others.

"Yea, truly, such an one I saw," said the man; "but he is dead, and lo!
his body is hard by in a bush."

Then he showed him a newly slain body lying in a thick bush, which
seemed indeed to be Sir Lionel. Then made Sir Bors such mourning and
sorrow that by-and-by he fell into a swoon upon the ground. And when he
came to himself again, he took the body in his arms and put it on his
horse's saddle, and bore it to a chapel hard by, and would have buried
it. But when he made the sign of the cross, he heard a full great noise
and cry as though all the fiends of hell had been about him, and
suddenly the body and the chapel and the old man vanished all away. Then
he knew that it was the devil who had thus beguiled him, and that his
brother yet lived.

Then held he up his hands to heaven, and thanked God for his own escape
from hurt, and rode onwards; and anon, as he passed by an hermitage in a
forest, he saw his brother sitting armed by the door. And when he saw
him he was filled with joy, and lighted from his horse, and ran to him
and said, "Fair brother, when came ye hither?"

But Sir Lionel answered, with an angry face, "What vain words be these,
when for you I might have been slain? Did ye not see me bound and led
away to death, and left me in that peril to go succoring a gentlewoman,
the like whereof no brother ever yet hath done? Now, for thy false
misdeed, I do defy thee, and ensure thee speedy death."

Then Sir Bors prayed his brother to abate his anger, and said, "Fair
brother, remember the love that should be between us twain."

But Sir Lionel would not hear, and prepared to fight, and mounted his
horse and came before him, crying, "Sir Bors, keep thee from me, for I
shall do to thee as a felon and a traitor; therefore, start upon thy
horse, for if thou wilt not, I will run upon thee as thou standest."

But for all his words Sir Bors would not defend himself against his
brother. And anon the fiend stirred up Sir Lionel to such rage, that he
rushed over him and overthrew him with his horse's hoofs, so that he lay
swooning on the ground. Then would he have rent off his helm and slain
him, but the hermit of that place ran out, and prayed him to forbear,
and shielded Sir Bors with his body.

Then Sir Lionel cried out, "Now, God so help me, sir priest, but I shall
slay thee else thou depart, and him too after thee."

And when the good man utterly refused to leave Sir Bors, he smote him on
the head until he died, and then he took his brother by the helm and
unlaced it, to have stricken off his head, and so he would have done,
but suddenly was pulled off backwards by a knight of the Round Table,
who, by the will of Heaven, was passing by that place--Sir Colgrevance
by name.

"Sir Lionel," he cried, "will ye slay your brother, one of the best
knights of all the world? That ought no man to suffer."

"Why," said Sir Lionel, "will ye hinder me and meddle in this strife?
beware, lest I shall slay both thee and him."

And when Sir Colgrevance refused to let them be, Sir Lionel defied him,
and gave him a great stroke through the helmet, whereat Sir Colgrevance
drew his sword, and smote again right manfully. And so long they fought
together that Sir Bors awoke from his swoon, and tried to rise and part
them, but had no strength to stand upon his feet.

Anon Sir Colgrevance saw him, and cried out to him for help, for now Sir
Lionel had nigh defeated him. When Sir Bors heard that, he struggled to
his feet, and put his helmet on, and took his sword. But before he could
come to him, Sir Lionel had smitten off Sir Colgrevance's helm, and
thrown him to the earth and slain him. Then turned he to his brother as
a man possessed by fiends, and gave him such a stroke as bent him nearly
double.

But Sir Bors prayed him for God's sake to quit that battle, "For if it
befell us that we either slew the other we should die for care of that
sin."

"Never will I spare thee if I master thee," cried out Sir Lionel.

Then Sir Bors drew his sword all weeping, and said, "Now, God have mercy
on me, though I defend my life against my brother"; with that he lifted
up his sword to strike, but suddenly he heard a mighty voice, "Put up
thy sword, Sir Bors, and flee, or thou shalt surely slay him." And then
there fell upon them both a fiery cloud, which flamed and burned their
shields, and they fell to the earth in sore dread.

Anon Sir Bors rose to his feet, and saw that Sir Lionel had taken no
harm. Then came the voice again, and said, "Sir Bors, go hence and leave
thy brother, and ride thou forward to the sea, for there Sir Percival
abideth thee."

Then he said to his brother, "Brother, forgive me all my trespass
against thee."

And Sir Lionel answered, "God forgive it thee, as I do."

Then he departed and rode to the sea, and on the strand he found a ship
all covered with white samite, and as soon as he had entered thereinto,
it put forth from the shore. And in the midst of the ship there stood an
armed knight, whom he knew to be Sir Percival. Then they rejoiced
greatly over each other, and said, "We lack nothing now but the good
knight Sir Galahad."

Now when Sir Galahad had rescued Sir Percival from the twenty knights he
rode into a vast forest. And after many days it befell that he came to a
castle whereat was a tournament. And the knights of the castle were put
to the worse; which when he saw, he set his spear in rest and ran to
help them, and smote down many of their adversaries. And as it chanced,
Sir Gawain was amongst the stranger knights, and when he saw the white
shield with the red cross, he knew it was Sir Galahad, and proffered to
joust with him. So they encountered, and having broken their spears,
they drew their swords, and Sir Galahad smote Sir Gawain so sorely on
the helm that he clove it through, and struck on slanting to the earth,
carving the horse's shoulder in twain, and Sir Gawain fell to the earth.
Then Sir Galahad beat back all who warred against the castle, yet would
he not wait for thanks, but rode away that no man might know him.

And he rested that night at a hermitage, and when he was asleep, he
heard a knocking at the door. So he rose, and found a damsel there, who
said, "Sir Galahad, I will that ye arm you, and mount upon your horse
and follow me, for I will show you within these three days the highest
adventure that ever any knight saw."

Anon Sir Galahad armed him, and took his horse, and commended himself to
God, and bade the gentlewoman go, and he would follow where she liked.

So they rode onwards to the sea as fast as their horses might gallop,
and at night they came to a castle in a valley, inclosed by running
water, and by strong and high walls, whereinto they entered and had
great cheer, for the lady of the castle was the damsel's mistress.

And when he was unarmed, the damsel said to her lady, "Madam, shall we
abide here this night?"

"Nay," said she, "but only till he hath dined and slept a little."

So he ate and slept a while, till the maid called him, and armed him by
torchlight; and when he had saluted the lady of the castle, the damsel
and Sir Galahad rode on.

Anon they came to the seaside, and lo! the ship, wherein were Sir
Percival and Sir Bors, abode by the shore. Then they cried, "Welcome,
Sir Galahad, for we have awaited thee long."

Then they rejoiced to see each other, and told of all their adventures
and temptations. And the damsel went into the ship with them, and spake
to Sir Percival: "Sir Percival, know ye not who I am?"

And he replied, "Nay, certainly, I know thee not."

Then said she, "I am thy sister, the daughter of King Pellinore, and am
sent to help thee and these knights, thy fellows, to achieve the quest
which ye all follow."

So Sir Percival rejoiced to see his sister, and they departed from the
shore. And after a while they came upon a whirlpool, where their ship
could not live. Then saw they another greater ship hard by and went
towards it, but saw neither man nor woman therein. And on the end of it
these words were written, "Thou who shalt enter me, beware that thou be
in steadfast belief, for I am Faith; and if thou doubtest, I cannot help
thee." Then were they all adread, but, commending themselves to God,
they entered in.

As soon as they were on board they saw a fair bed, whereon lay a crown
of silk, and at the foot was a fair and rich sword drawn from its
scabbard half a foot and more. The pommel was of precious stones of many
colors, every color having a different virtue, and the scales of the
haft were of two ribs of different beasts. The one was bone of a serpent
from Calidone forest, named the serpent of the fiend; and its virtue
saveth all men who hold it from weariness. The other was of a fish that
haunteth the floods of Euphrates, named Ertanax; and its virtue causeth
whoever holdeth it to forget all other things, whether of joy or pain,
save the thing he seeth before him.

"In the name of God," said Sir Percival, "I shall assay to handle this
sword"; and set his hand to it, but could not grasp it. "By my faith,"
said he, "now have I failed."

Sir Bors set his hand to it, and failed also.

Then came Sir Galahad, and saw these letters written red as blood, "None
shall draw me forth save the hardiest of all men; but he that draweth me
shall never be shamed or wounded to death." "By my faith," said Sir
Galahad, "I would draw it forth, but dare not try."

"Ye may try safely," said the gentlewoman, Sir Percival's sister, "for
be ye well assured the drawing of this sword is forbid to all but you.
For this was the sword of David, King of Israel, and Solomon his son
made for it this marvelous pommel and this wondrous sheath, and laid it
on this bed till thou shouldest come and take it up; and though before
thee some have dared to raise it, yet have they all been maimed or
wounded for their daring."

"Where," said Sir Galahad, "shall we find a girdle for it?"

"Fair sir," said she, "dismay you not"; and therewith took from out a
box a girdle, nobly wrought with golden thread, set full of precious
stones and with a rich gold buckle. "This girdle, lords," said she, "is
made for the most part of mine own hair, which, while I was yet in the
world, I loved full well; but when I knew that this adventure was
ordained me, I cut off and wove as ye now see."

Then they all prayed Sir Galahad to take the sword, and so anon he
gripped it in his fingers; and the maiden girt it round his waist,
saying, "Now reck I not though I die, for I have made thee the worthiest
knight of all the world."

"Fair damsel," said Sir Galahad, "ye have done so much that I shall be
your knight all the days of my life."

Then the ship sailed a great way on the sea, and brought them to land
near the Castle of Carteloise. When they were landed came a squire and
asked them, "Be ye of King Arthur's court?"

"We are," said they.

"In an evil hour are ye come," said he, and went back swiftly to the
castle.

Within a while they heard a great horn blow, and saw a multitude of
well-armed knights come forth, who bade them yield or die. At that they
ran together, and Sir Percival smote one to the earth and mounted his
horse, and so likewise did Sir Bors and Sir Galahad, and soon had they
routed all their enemies and alighted on foot, and with their swords
slew them downright, and entered into the castle.

Then came there forth a priest, to whom Sir Galahad kneeled and said,
"In sooth, good father, I repent me of this slaughter; but we were first
assailed, or else it had not been."

"Repent ye not," said the good man, "for if ye lived as long as the
world lasted ye could do no better deed, for these were all the felon
sons of a good knight, Earl Hernox, whom they have thrown into a
dungeon, and in his name have slain priests and clerks, and beat down
chapels far and near."

Then Sir Galahad prayed the priest to bring him to the earl; who, when
he saw Sir Galahad, cried out, "Long have I waited for thy coming, and
now I pray thee hold me in thine arms that I may die in peace."

And therewith, when Sir Galahad had taken him in his arms, his soul
departed from his body.

Then came a voice in the hearing of them all, "Depart now, Sir Galahad,
and go quickly to the maimed king, for he hath long abided to receive
health from thy hand."

So the three knights departed, and Sir Percival's sister with them, and
came to a vast forest, and saw before them a white hart, exceeding fair,
led by four lions; and marveling greatly at that sight, they followed.

Anon they came to a hermitage and a chapel, whereunto the hart entered,
and the lions with it. Then a priest offered mass, and presently they
saw the hart change into the figure of a man, most sweet and comely to
behold; and the four lions also changed and became a man, an eagle, a
lion, and an ox. And suddenly all those five figures vanished without
sound. Then the knights marveled greatly, and fell upon their knees, and
when they rose they prayed the priest to tell them what that sight might
mean.

"What saw ye, sirs?" said he, "for I saw nothing." Then they told him.

"Ah, lords!" said he, "ye are full welcome; now know I well ye be the
knights who shall achieve the Sangreal, for unto them alone such
mysteries are revealed. The hart ye saw is One above all men, white and
without blemish, and the four lions with Him are the four evangelists."

When they heard that they heartily rejoiced, and thanking the priest,
departed.

Anon, as they passed by a certain castle, an armed knight suddenly came
after them, and cried out to the damsel, "By the holy cross, ye shall
not go till ye have yielded to the custom of the castle."

"Let her go," said Sir Percival, "for a maiden, wheresoever she cometh,
is free."

"Whatever maiden passeth here," replied the knight, "must give a dishful
of her blood from her right arm."

"It is a foul and shameful custom," cried Sir Galahad and both his
fellows, "and sooner will we die than let this maiden yield thereto."

"Then shall ye die," replied the knight, and as he spake there came out
from a gate hard by, ten or twelve more, and encountered with them,
running upon them vehemently with a great cry. But the three knights
withstood them, and set their hands to their swords, and beat them down
and slew them.

At that came forth a company of threescore knights, all armed. "Fair
lords," said Sir Galahad, "have mercy on yourselves and keep from us."

"Nay, fair lords," they answered, "rather be advised by us, and yield ye
to our custom."

"It is an idle word," said Galahad, "in vain ye speak it."

"Well," said they, "will ye die?"

"We be not come thereto as yet," replied Sir Galahad.

Then did they fall upon each other, and Sir Galahad drew forth his
sword, and smote on the right hand and on the left, and slew so mightily
that all who saw him thought he was a monster and no earthly man. And
both his comrades helped him well, and so they held the field against
that multitude till it was night. Then came a good knight forward from
the enemy and said, "Fair knights, abide with us to-night and be right
welcome; by the faith of our bodies as we are true knights, to-morrow ye
shall rise unharmed, and meanwhile maybe ye will, of your own accord,
accept the custom of the castle when ye know it better."

So they entered and alighted and made great cheer. Anon, they asked them
whence that custom came. "The lady of this castle is a leper," said
they, "and can be no way cured save by the blood of a pure virgin and a
king's daughter; therefore to save her life are we her servants bound to
stay every maid that passeth by, and try if her blood may not cure our
mistress."

Then said the damsel, "Take ye of my blood as much as ye will, if it may
avail your lady."

And though the three knights urged her not to put her life in that great
peril, she replied, "If I die to heal another's body, I shall get health
to my soul," and would not be persuaded to refuse.

So on the morrow she was brought to the sick lady, and her arm was
bared, and a vein thereof was opened, and the dish filled with her
blood. Then the sick lady was anointed therewith, and anon she was whole
of her malady. With that Sir Percival's sister lifted up her hand and
blessed her, saying, "Madam, I am come to my death to make you whole;
for God's love pray for me"; and thus saying she fell down in a swoon.

Then Sir Galahad, Sir Percival, and Sir Bors started to lift her up and
staunch her blood, but she had lost too much to live. So when she came
to herself she said to Sir Percival, "Fair brother, I must die for the
healing of this lady, and now, I pray thee, bury me not here, but when I
am dead put me in a boat at the next haven and let me float at venture
on the sea. And when ye come to the city of Sarras, to achieve the
Sangreal, shall ye find me waiting by a tower, and there I pray thee
bury me, for there shall Sir Galahad and ye also be laid." Thus having
said, she died.

Then Sir Percival wrote all the story of her life and put it in her
right hand, and so laid her in a barge and covered it with silk. And
the wind arising drove the barge from land, and all the knights stood
watching it till it was out of sight.

Anon they returned to the castle, and forthwith fell a sudden tempest of
thunder and lightning and rain, as if the earth were broken up: and half
the castle was thrown down. Then came a voice to the three knights which
said, "Depart ye now asunder till ye meet again where the maimed king is
lying." So they parted and rode divers ways.

Now after Sir Lancelot had left the hermit, he rode a long while till he
knew not whither to turn, and so he lay down to sleep, if haply he might
dream whither to go.

And in his sleep a vision came to him saying, "Lancelot, rise up and
take thine armor, and enter the first ship that thou shalt find."

When he awoke he obeyed the vision, and rode till he came to the
sea-shore, and found there a ship without sails or oars, and as soon as
he was in it he smelt the sweetest savor he had ever known, and seemed
filled with all things he could think of or desire. And looking round he
saw a fair bed, and thereon a gentlewoman lying dead, who was Sir
Percival's sister. And as Sir Lancelot looked on her he spied the
writing in her right hand, and, taking it, he read therein her story.
And more than a month thereafter he abode in that ship and was nourished
by the grace of Heaven, as Israel was fed with manna in the desert.

And on a certain night he went ashore to pass the time, for he was
somewhat weary, and, listening, he heard a horse come towards him, from
which a knight alighted and went up into the ship; who, when he saw Sir
Lancelot, said, "Fair sir, ye be right welcome to mine eyes, for I am
thy son Galahad, and long time I have sought for thee." With that he
kneeled and asked his blessing, and took off his helm and kissed him,
and the great joy there was between them no tongue can tell.

Then for half a year they dwelt together in the ship, and served God
night and day with all their powers, and went to many unknown islands,
where none but wild beasts haunted, and there found many strange and
perilous adventures.

And upon a time they came to the edge of a forest, before a cross of
stone, and saw a knight armed all in white, leading a white horse. Then
the knight saluted them, and said to Galahad, "Ye have been long time
enough with your father; now, therefore, leave him and ride this horse
till ye achieve the Holy Quest."

Then went Sir Galahad to his father and kissed him full courteously, and
said, "Fair father, I know not when I shall see thee again."

And as he took his horse a voice spake in their hearing, "Ye shall meet
no more in this life."

"Now, my son, Sir Galahad," said Sir Lancelot, "since we must so part
and see each other never more, I pray the High Father of Heaven to
preserve both you and me."

Then they bade farewell, and Sir Galahad entered the forest, and Sir
Lancelot returned to the ship, and the wind rose and drove him more than
a month through the sea, whereby he slept but little, yet ever prayed
that he might see the Sangreal.

So it befell upon a certain midnight, the moon shining clear, he came
before a fair and rich castle, whereof the postern gate was open towards
the sea, having no keeper save two lions in the entry.

Anon Sir Lancelot heard a voice: "Leave now thy ship and go within the
castle, and thou shalt see a part of thy desire."

Then he armed and went towards the gate, and coming to the lions he drew
out his sword, but suddenly a dwarf rushed out and smote him on the arm,
so that he dropt his sword, and heard again the voice, "Oh, man of evil
faith, and poor belief, wherefore trustest thou thine arms above thy
Maker?" Then he put up his sword and signed the cross upon his forehead,
and so passed by the lions without hurt.

And going in, he found a chamber with the door shut, which in vain he
tried to open. And listening thereat he heard a voice within, which sang
so sweetly that it seemed no earthly thing, "Joy and honor be to the
Father of Heaven!" Then he kneeled down at the door, for he knew well
the Sangreal was there within.

Anon the door was opened without hands, and forthwith came thereout so
great a splendor as if all the torches of the world had been alight
together. But when he would have entered in, a voice forbade him;
wherefore he drew back, and looked, standing upon the threshold of the
door. And there he saw a table of silver, and the holy vessel covered
with red samite, and many angels round it holding burning candles and a
cross and all the ornaments of the altar.

Then a priest stood up and offered mass, and when he took the vessel up,
he seemed to sink beneath that burden. At that Sir Lancelot cried, "O
Father, take it not for sin that I go in to help the priest, who hath
much need thereof." So saying, he went in, but when he came towards the
table he felt a breath of fire which issued out therefrom and smote him
to the ground, so that he had no power to rise.

Then felt he many hands about him, which took him up and laid him down
outside the chapel door. There lay he in a swoon all through that night,
and on the morrow certain people found him senseless, and bore him to an
inner chamber and laid him on a bed. And there he rested, living, but
moving no limbs, twenty-four days and nights.

On the twenty-fifth day he opened his eyes and saw those standing round,
and said, "Why have ye waked me? for I have seen marvels that no tongue
can tell, and more than any heart can think."

Then he asked where he was, and they told him, "In the Castle of
Carbonek."

"Tell your lord, King Pelles," said he, "that I am Sir Lancelot."

At that they marveled greatly, and told their lord it was Sir Lancelot
who had lain there so long.

Then was King Pelles wondrous glad and went to see him, and prayed him
to abide there for a season. But Sir Lancelot said, "I know well that I
have now seen as much as mine eyes may behold of the Sangreal; wherefore
I will return to my own country." So he took leave of King Pelles, and
departed towards Logris.

Now after Sir Galahad had parted from Sir Lancelot, he rode many days,
till he came to the monastery where the blind King Evelake lay, whom Sir
Percival had seen. And on the morrow, when he had heard mass, Sir
Galahad desired to see the king, who cried out, "Welcome, Sir Galahad,
servant of the Lord! long have I abided thy coming. Take me now in thine
arms, that I may die in peace."

At that Sir Galahad embraced him; and when he had so done the king's
eyes were opened, and he said, "Fair Lord Jesus, suffer me now to come
to Thee"; and anon his soul departed.

Then they buried him royally, as a king should be; and Sir Galahad went
on his way.

Within a while he came to a chapel in a forest, in the crypt whereof he
saw a tomb which always blazed and burnt. And asking the brethren what
that might mean, they told him, "Joseph of Arimathea's son did found
this monastery, and one who wronged him hath lain here these three
hundred and fifty years and burneth evermore, until that perfect knight
who shall achieve the Sangreal doth quench the fire."

Then said he, "I pray ye bring me to the tomb."

And when he touched the place immediately the fire was quenched, and a
voice came from the grave and cried, "Thanks be to God, who now hath
purged me of my sin, and draweth me from earthly pains into the joys of
paradise."

Then Sir Galahad took the body in his arms and bore it to the abbey, and
on the morrow put it in the earth before the high altar.

Anon he departed from thence and rode five days in a great forest; and
after that he met Sir Percival, and a little further on Sir Bors. When
they had told each other their adventures, they rode together to the
Castle of Carbonek: and there King Pelles gave them hearty welcome, for
he knew they should achieve the Holy Quest.

As soon as they were come into the castle, a voice cried in the midst of
the chamber, "Let them who ought not now to sit at the table of the Lord
rise and depart hence!" Then all, save those three knights, departed.

Anon they saw other knights come in with haste at the hall doors and
take their harness off, who said to Sir Galahad, "Sir, we have tried
sore to be with you at this table."

"Ye be welcome," said he, "but whence are ye?"

So three of them said they were from Gaul; and three from Ireland; and
three from Denmark.

Then came forth the likeness of a bishop, with a cross in his hand, and
four angels stood by him, and a table of silver was before them, whereon
was set the vessel of the Sangreal. Then came forth other angels
also--two bearing burning candles, and the third a towel, and the
fourth a spear which bled marvelously, the drops wherefrom fell into a
box he held in his left hand. Anon the bishop took the wafer up to
consecrate it, and at the lifting up, they saw the figure of a Child,
whose visage was as bright as any fire, which smote itself into the
midst of the wafer and vanished, so that all saw the flesh made bread.

Thereat the bishop went to Galahad and kissed him, and bade him go and
kiss his fellows; and said, "Now, servants of the Lord, prepare for food
such as none ever yet were fed with since the world began."

With that he vanished, and the knights were filled with a great dread
and prayed devoutly.

Then saw they come forth from the holy vessel the vision of a man
bleeding all openly, whom they knew well by the tokens of His passion
for the Lord Himself. At that they fell upon their faces and were dumb.
Anon he brought the Holy Grail to them and spake high words of comfort,
and, when they drank therefrom, the taste thereof was sweeter than any
tongue could tell or heart desire. Then a voice said to Galahad, "Son,
with this blood which drippeth from the spear anoint thou the maimed
king and heal him. And when thou hast this done, depart hence with thy
brethren in a ship that ye shall find, and go to the city of Sarras. And
bear with thee the holy vessel, for it shall no more be seen in the
realm of Logris."

At that Sir Galahad walked to the bleeding spear, and therefrom
anointing his fingers went out straightway to the maimed King Pelles,
and touched his wound. Then suddenly he uprose from his bed as whole a
man as ever he was, and praised God passing thankfully with all his
heart.

Then Sir Galahad, Sir Bors, and Sir Percival departed as they had been
told; and when they had ridden three days they came to the sea-shore,
and found the ship awaiting them. Therein they entered, and saw in the
midst the silver table and the vessel of the Sangreal, covered with red
samite. Then were they passing glad, and made great reverence thereto.
And Sir Galahad prayed that now he might leave the world and pass to
God. And presently, the while he prayed, a voice said to him, "Galahad,
thy prayer is heard, and when thou asketh the death of the body thou
shalt have it, and find the life of thy soul."

But while they prayed and slept the ship sailed on, and when they woke
they saw the city of Sarras before them, and the other ship wherein was
Sir Percival's sister. Then the three knights took up the holy table and
the Sangreal and went into the city; and there, in a chapel, they buried
Sir Percival's sister right solemnly.

Now at the gate of the town they saw an old cripple sitting, whom Sir
Galahad called to help them bear their weight.

"Truly," said the old man, "it is ten years since I have gone a step
without these crutches."

"Care ye not," said Sir Galahad, "rise now and show goodwill."

So he assayed to move, and found his limbs as strong as any man's might
be, and running to the table helped to carry it.

Anon there rose a rumor in the city that a cripple had been healed by
certain marvelous strange knights.

But the king, named Estouranse, who was a heathen tyrant, when he heard
thereof took Sir Galahad and his fellows, and put them in prison in a
deep hole. Therein they abode a great while, but ever the Sangreal was
with them and fed them with marvelous sweet food, so that they fainted
not, but had all joy and comfort they could wish.

At the year's end the king fell sick and felt that he should die. Then
sent he for the three knights, and when they came before him prayed
their mercy for his trespasses against them. So they forgave him gladly,
and anon he died.

Then the chief men of the city took counsel together who should be king
in his stead, and as they talked, a voice cried in their midst, "Choose
ye the youngest of the three knights King Estouranse cast into prison
for your king." At that they sought Sir Galahad and made him king with
the assent of all the city, and else they would have slain him.

But within a twelve-month came to him, upon a certain day, as he prayed
before the Sangreal, a man in likeness of a bishop, with a great company
of angels round about him, who offered mass, and afterwards called to
Sir Galahad, "Come forth, thou servant of the Lord, for the time hath
come thou hast desired so long."

Then Sir Galahad lifted up his hands and prayed, "Now, blessed Lord!
would I no longer live if it might please Thee."

Anon the bishop gave him the sacrament, and when he had received it with
unspeakable gladness, he said, "Who art thou, father?"

"I am Joseph of Arimathea," answered he, "whom our Lord hath sent to
bear thee fellowship."

When he heard that, Sir Galahad went to Sir Percival and Sir Bors and
kissed them and commended them to God, saying, "Salute for me Sir
Lancelot, my father, and bid them remember this unstable world."

Therewith he kneeled down and prayed, and suddenly his soul departed,
and a multitude of angels bare it up to heaven. Then came a hand from
heaven and took the vessel and the spear and bare them out of sight.

Since then was never man so hardy as to say that he had seen the
Sangreal.

And after all these things, Sir Percival put off his armor and betook
him to an hermitage, and within a little while passed out of this world.
And Sir Bors, when he had buried him beside his sister, returned,
weeping sore for the loss of his two brethren, to King Arthur, at
Camelot.




THE PASSING OF ARTHUR




XIV