Now Arthur the prince had all this time been nourished in Sir Ector's
house as his own son, and was fair and tall and comely, being of the age
of fifteen years, great in strength, gentle in manner, and accomplished
in all exercises proper for the training of a knight.

But as yet he knew not of his father; for Merlin had so dealt, that none
save Uther and himself knew aught about him. Wherefore it befell that
many of the knights and barons who heard King Uther speak before his
death, and call his son Arthur his successor, were in great amazement;
and some doubted, and others were displeased.

Anon the chief lords and princes set forth each to his own land, and,
raising armed men and multitudes of followers, determined every one to
gain the crown for himself; for they said in their hearts, "If there be
any such a son at all as he of whom this wizard forced the king to
speak, who are we that a beardless boy should have rule over us?"

So the land stood long in great peril, for every lord and baron sought
but his own advantage; and the Saxons, growing ever more adventurous,
wasted and overran the towns and villages in every part.

Then Merlin went to Brice, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and advised him
to require all the earls and barons of the realm and all knights and
gentlemen-at-arms to come to him at London, before Christmas, under pain
of cursing, that they might learn the will of Heaven who should be king.
This, therefore, the archbishop did, and upon Christmas Eve were met
together in London all the greatest princes, lords, and barons; and long
before day they prayed in St. Paul's Church, and the archbishop besought
Heaven for a sign who should be lawful king of all the realm.

And as they prayed, there was seen in the churchyard, set straight
before the doorways of the church, a huge square stone having a naked
sword stuck in the midst of it. And on the sword was written in letters
of gold, "Whoso pulleth out the sword from this stone is born the
rightful King of England."

At this all the people wondered greatly; and, when Mass was over, the
nobles, knights, and princes ran out eagerly from the church to see the
stone and sword; and a law was forthwith made that whoso should pull out
the sword should be acknowledged straightway King of Britain.

Then many knights and barons pulled at the sword with all their might,
and some of them tried many times, but none could stir or move it.

When all had tried in vain, the archbishop declared the man whom Heaven
had chosen was not yet there. "But God," said he, "will doubtless make
him known ere many days."

So ten knights were chosen, being men of high renown, to watch and keep
the sword; and there was proclamation made through all the land that
whosoever would, had leave and liberty to try and pull it from the
stone. But though great multitudes of people came, both gentle and
simple, for many days, no man could ever move the sword a hair's breadth
from its place.

Now, at the New Year's Eve a great tournament was to be held in London,
which the archbishop had devised to keep together lords and commons,
lest they should grow estranged in the troublous and unsettled times. To
the which tournament there came, with many other knights, Sir Ector,
Arthur's foster-father, who had great possessions near to London; and
with him came his son, Sir Key, but recently made knight, to take his
part in the jousting, and young Arthur also to witness all the sports
and fighting.

But as they rode towards the jousts, Sir Key found suddenly he had no
sword, for he had left it at his father's house; and turning to young
Arthur, he prayed him to ride back and fetch it for him. "I will with a
good will," said Arthur; and rode fast back after the sword.

But when he came to the house he found it locked and empty, for all were
gone forth to see the tournament. Whereat, being angry and impatient, he
said within himself, "I will ride to the churchyard and take with me
the sword that sticketh in the stone, for my brother shall not go
without a sword this day."

So he rode and came to the churchyard, and alighting from his horse he
tied him to the gate, and went to the pavilion, which was pitched near
the stone, wherein abode the ten knights who watched and kept it; but he
found no knights there, for all were gone to see the jousting.

Then he took the sword by its handle, and lightly and fiercely he pulled
it out of the stone, and took his horse and rode until he came to Sir
Key and delivered him the sword. But as soon as Sir Key saw it he knew
well it was the sword of the stone, and, riding swiftly to his father,
he cried out, "Lo! here, sir, is the sword of the stone, wherefore it is
I who must be king of all this land."

When Sir Ector saw the sword, he turned back straight with Arthur and
Sir Key and came to the churchyard, and there alighting, they went all
three into the church, and Sir Key was sworn to tell truly how he came
by the sword. Then he confessed it was his brother Arthur who had
brought it to him.

Whereat Sir Ector, turning to young Arthur, asked him--"How gottest thou
the sword?"

"Sir," said he, "I will tell you. When I went home to fetch my brother's
sword, I found nobody to deliver it to me, for all were abroad to the
jousts. Yet was I loth to leave my brother swordless, and, bethinking me
of this one, I came hither eagerly to fetch it for him, and pulled it
out of the stone without any pain."

Then said Sir Ector, much amazed and looking steadfastly on Arthur, "If
this indeed be thus, 'tis thou who shalt be king of all this land--and
God will have it so--for none but he who should be rightful Lord of
Britain might ever draw this sword forth from that stone. But let me now
with mine own eyes see thee put back the sword into its place and draw
it forth again."

"That is no mastery," said Arthur; and straightway set it in the stone.
And then Sir Ector pulled at it himself, and after him Sir Key, with all
his might, but both of them in vain: then Arthur, reaching forth his
hand and grasping at the pommel, pulled it out easily, and at once.

Then fell Sir Ector down upon his knees upon the ground before young
Arthur, and Sir Key also with him, and straightway did him homage as
their sovereign lord.

But Arthur cried aloud, "Alas! mine own dear father and my brother, why
kneel ye thus to me?"

"Nay, my Lord Arthur," answered then Sir Ector, "we are of no
blood-kinship with thee, and little though I thought how high thy kin
might be, yet wast thou never more than foster-child of mine." And then
he told him all he knew about his infancy, and how a stranger had
delivered him, with a great sum of gold, into his hands to be brought up
and nourished as his own born child, and then had disappeared.

But when young Arthur heard of it, he fell upon Sir Ector's neck, and
wept, and made great lamentation, "For now," said he, "I have in one
day lost my father and my mother and my brother."

"Sir," said Sir Ector presently, "when thou shalt be made king be good
and gracious unto me and mine."

"If not," said Arthur, "I were no true man's son at all, for thou art he
in all the world to whom I owe the most; and my good lady and mother,
thy wife, hath ever kept and fostered me as though I were her own; so if
it be God's will that I be king hereafter as thou sayest, desire of me
whatever thing thou wilt and I will do it; and God forbid that I should
fail thee in it."

"I will but pray," replied Sir Ector, "that thou wilt make my son Sir
Key, thy foster-brother, seneschal of all the lands."

"That shall he be," said Arthur; "and never shall another hold that
office, save thy son, while he and I do live."

Anon, they left the church and went to the archbishop to tell him that
the sword had been achieved. And when he saw the sword in Arthur's hand
he set a day and summoned all the princes, knights, and barons to meet
again at St. Paul's Church and see the will of Heaven signified. So when
they came together, the sword was put back in the stone, and all tried,
from the greatest to the least, to move it; but there before them all
not one could take it out save Arthur only.

But then befell a great confusion and dispute, for some cried out it was
the will of Heaven, and, "Long live King Arthur," but many more were
full of wrath and said, "What! would ye give the ancient scepter of this
land unto a boy born none know how?" And the contention growing greatly,
till nothing could be done to pacify their rage, the meeting was at
length broken up by the archbishop and adjourned till Candlemas, when
all should meet again.

But when Candlemas was come, Arthur alone again pulled forth the sword,
though more than ever came to win it; and the barons, sorely vexed and
angry, put it in delay till Easter. But as he had sped before so he did
at Easter, and the barons yet once more contrived delays till Pentecost.

But now the archbishop, fully seeing God's will, called together, by
Merlin's counsel, a band of knights and gentlemen-at-arms, and set them
about Arthur to keep him safely till the Feast of Pentecost. And when at
the feast Arthur still again alone prevailed to move the sword, the
people all with one accord cried out, "Long live King Arthur! we will
have no more delay, nor any other king, for so it is God's will; and we
will slay whoso resisteth Him and Arthur;" and wherewithal they kneeled
down all at once, and cried for Arthur's grace and pardon that they had
so long delayed him from his crown. Then he full sweetly and
majestically pardoned them; and taking in his hand the sword, he offered
it upon the high altar of the church.

Anon was he solemnly knighted with great pomp by the most famous knight
there present, and the crown was placed upon his head; and, having
taken oath to all the people, lords and commons, to be true king and
deal in justice only unto his life's end, he received homage and service
from all the barons who held lands and castles from the crown. Then he
made Sir Key, High Steward of England, and Sir Badewaine of Britain,
Constable, and Sir Ulfius, Chamberlain: and after this, with all his
court and a great retinue of knights and armed men, he journeyed into
Wales, and was crowned again in the old city of Caerleon-upon-Usk.

Meanwhile those knights and barons who had so long delayed him from the
crown, met together and went up to the coronation feast at Caerleon, as
if to do him homage; and there they ate and drank such things as were
set before them at the royal banquet, sitting with the others in the
great hall.

But when after the banquet Arthur began, according to the ancient royal
custom, to bestow great boons and fiefs on whom he would, they all with
one accord rose up, and scornfully refused his gifts, crying that they
would take nothing from a beardless boy come of low or unknown birth,
but would instead give him good gifts of hard sword-strokes between neck
and shoulders.

Whereat arose a deadly tumult in the hall, and every man there made him
ready to fight. But Arthur leaped up as a flame of fire against them,
and all his knights and barons drawing their swords, rushed after him
upon them and began a full sore battle; and presently the king's party
prevailed, and drave the rebels from the hall and from the city, closing
the gates behind them; and King Arthur brake his sword upon them in his
eagerness and rage.

But amongst them were six kings of great renown and might, who more than
all raged against Arthur and determined to destroy him, namely, King
Lot, King Nanters, King Urien, King Carados, King Yder, and King
Anguisant. These six, therefore, joining their armies together, laid
close siege to the city of Caerleon, wherefrom King Arthur had so
shamefully driven them.

And after fifteen days Merlin came suddenly into their camp and asked
them what this treason meant. Then he declared to them that Arthur was
no base adventurer, but King Uther's son, whom they were bound to serve
and honor even though Heaven had not vouch-safed the wondrous miracle of
the sword. Some of the kings, when they heard Merlin speak thus,
marveled and believed him; but others, as King Lot, laughed him and his
words to scorn, and mocked him for a conjurer and wizard. But it was
agreed with Merlin that Arthur should come forth and speak with the
kings.

So he went forth to them to the city gate, and with him the archbishop
and Merlin, and Sir Key, Sir Brastias, and a great company of others.
And he spared them not in his speech, but spoke to them as king and
chieftain, telling them plainly he would make them all bow to him if he
lived, unless they choose to do him homage there and then; and so they
parted in great wrath, and each side armed in haste.

"What will ye do?" said Merlin to the kings; "ye had best hold your
hands, for were ye ten times as many ye should not prevail."

"Shall we be afraid of a dream-reader?" quoth King Lot in scorn.

With that Merlin vanished away and came to King Arthur.

Then Arthur said to Merlin, "I have need now of a sword that shall
chastise these rebels terribly."

"Come then with me," said Merlin, "for hard by there is a sword that I
can gain for thee."

So they rode out that night till they came to a fair and broad lake, and
in the midst of it King Arthur saw an arm thrust up, clothed in white
samite, and holding a great sword in the hand.

"Lo! yonder is the sword I spoke of," said Merlin.

Then saw they a damsel floating on the lake in the moonlight. "What
damsel is that?" said the king.

"The lady of the lake," said Merlin; "for upon this lake there is a
rock, and on the rock a noble palace, where she abideth, and she will
come towards thee presently, when thou shalt ask her courteously for the
sword."

Therewith the damsel came to King Arthur, and saluted him, and he
saluted her, and said, "Lady, what sword is that the arm holdeth above
the water? I would that it were mine, for I have no sword."

"Sir King," said the lady of the lake, "that sword is mine, and if thou
wilt give me in return a gift whenever I shall ask it of thee, thou
shalt have it."

"By my faith," said he, "I will give thee any gift that thou shalt ask."

"Well," said the damsel, "go into yonder barge, and row thyself unto the
sword, and take it and the scabbard with thee, and I will ask my gift of
thee when I see my time."

So King Arthur and Merlin alighted, and tied their horses to two trees,
and went into the barge; and when they came to the sword that the hand
held, King Arthur took it by the handle and bore it with him, and the
arm and hand went down under the water; and so they came back to land,
and rode again to Caerleon.

On the morrow Merlin bade King Arthur to set fiercely on the enemy; and
in the meanwhile three hundred good knights went over to King Arthur
from the rebels' side. Then at the spring of day, when they had scarce
left their tents, he fell on them with might and main, and Sir
Badewaine, Sir Key, and Sir Brastias slew on the right and on the left
marvelously; and ever in the thickest of the fight King Arthur raged
like a young lion, and laid on with his sword, and did wondrous deeds of
arms, to the joy and admiration of the knights and barons who beheld
him.

Then King Lot, King Carados, and the King of the Hundred Knights--who
also was with them--going round to the rear, set on King Arthur fiercely
from behind; but King Arthur, turning to his knights, fought ever in the
foremost press until his horse was slain beneath him. At that, King Lot
rode furiously at him, and smote him down; but rising straightway, and
being set again on horseback, he drew his sword Excalibur that he had
gained by Merlin from the lady of the lake, which, shining brightly as
the light of thirty torches, dazzled the eyes of his enemies. And
therewith falling on them afresh with all his knights, he drove them
back and slew them in great numbers, and Merlin by his arts scattered
among them fire and pitchy smoke, so that they broke and fled. Then all
the common people of Caerleon, seeing them give way, rose up with one
accord, and rushed at them with clubs and staves, and chased them far
and wide, and slew many great knights and lords, and the remainder of
them fled and were seen no more. Thus won King Arthur his first battle
and put his enemies to shame.

But the six kings, though sorely routed, prepared for a new war, and
joining to themselves five others swore together that, whether for weal
or woe, they would keep steadfast alliance till they had destroyed King
Arthur. Then, with a host of 50,000 men-at-arms on horseback, and 10,000
foot, they were soon ready, and sent forth their fore-riders, and drew
from the northern country towards King Arthur, to the castle of
Bedgraine.

But he by Merlin's counsel had sent over sea to King Ban of Benwick and
King Bors of Gaul, praying them to come and help him in his wars, and
promising to help them in return against King Claudas, their foe. To
which those kings made answer that they would joyfully fulfil his wish,
and shortly after came to London with 300 knights, well arrayed for both
peace and war, leaving behind them a great army on the other side of the
sea till they had consulted with King Arthur and his ministers how they
might best dispose of it.

And Merlin being asked for his advice and help, agreed to go himself and
fetch it over sea to England, which in one night he did; and brought
with him 10,000 horsemen and led them northward privately to the forest
of Bedgraine, and there lodged them in a valley secretly.

Then, by the counsel of Merlin, when they knew which way the eleven
kings would ride and sleep, King Arthur with Kings Ban and Bors made
themselves ready with their army for the fight, having yet but 30,000
men, counting the 10,000 who had come from Gaul.

"Now shall ye do my advice," said Merlin; "I would that King Ban and
King Bors, with all their fellowship of 10,000 men, were led to ambush
in this wood ere daylight, and stir not therefrom until the battle hath
been long waged. And thou, Lord Arthur, at the spring of day draw forth
thine army before the enemy, and dress the battle so that they may at
once see all thy host, for they will be the more rash and hardy when
they see you have but 20,000 men."

To this the three knights and the barons heartily consented, and it was
done as Merlin had devised. So on the morrow when the hosts beheld each
other, the host of the north was greatly cheered to find so few led out
against them.

Then gave King Arthur the command to Sir Ulfius and Sir Brastias to take
3000 men-at-arms, and to open battle. They therefore setting fiercely on
the enemy slew them on the right hand and the left till it was wonderful
to see their slaughter.

When the eleven kings beheld so small a band doing such mighty deeds of
arms they were ashamed, and charged them fiercely in return. Then was
Sir Ulfius' horse slain under him; but he fought well and marvelously on
foot against Duke Eustace and King Clarience, who set upon him
grievously, till Sir Brastias, seeing his great peril, pricked towards
them swiftly, and so smote the duke through with his spear that horse
and man fell down and rolled over. Whereat King Clarience turned upon
Sir Brastias, and rushing furiously together they each unhorsed the
other and fell both to the ground, and there lay a long time stunned,
their horses' knees being cut to the bone. Then came Sir Key the
seneschal with six companions, and did wondrous well, till the eleven
kings went out against them and overthrew Sir Griflet and Sir Lucas the
butler. And when Sir Key saw Sir Griflet unhorsed and on foot, he rode
against King Nanters hotly and smote him down, and led his horse to
Griflet and horsed him again; with the same spear did Sir Key smite down
King Lot and wounded him full sore.

But seeing that, the King of the Hundred Knights rushed at Sir Key and
overthrew him in return, and took his horse and gave it to King Lot.
And when Sir Griflet saw Sir Key's mischance, he set his spear in rest,
and riding at a mighty man-at-arms, he cast him down headlong and caught
his horse and led it straightway to Sir Key.

By now the battle was growing perilous and hard, and both sides fought
with rage and fury. And Sir Ulfius and Sir Brastias were both afoot and
in great danger of their death, and foully stained and trampled under
horses' feet. Then King Arthur, putting spurs to his horse, rushed
forward like a lion into the midst of all the _melee_, and singling out
King Cradlemont of North Wales, smote him through the left side and
overthrew him, and taking his horse by the rein he brought it to Sir
Ulfius in haste and said, "Take this horse, mine old friend, for thou
hast great need of one, and charge by side of me." And even as he spoke
he saw Sir Ector, Sir Key's father, smitten to the earth by the King of
the Hundred Knights, and his horse taken to King Cradlemont.

But when King Arthur saw him ride upon Sir Ector's horse his wrath was
very great, and with his sword he smote King Cradlemont upon the helm,
and shore off the fourth part thereof and of the shield, and drave the
sword onward to the horse's neck and slew the horse, and hurled the king
upon the ground.

And now the battle waxed so great and furious that all the noise and
sound thereof rang out by water and by wood, so that Kings Ban and Bors,
with all their knights and men-at-arms in ambush, hearing the tumult
and the cries, trembled and shook for eagerness, and scarce could stay
in secret, but made them ready for the fray and dressed their shields
and harness.

But when King Arthur saw the fury of the enemy, he raged like a mad
lion, and stirred and drove his horse now here, now there, to the right
hand and to the left and stayed not in his wrath till he had slain full
twenty knights. He wounded also King Lot so sorely in the shoulder that
he left the field, and in great pain and dolor cried out to the other
kings, "Do ye as I devise, or we shall be destroyed. I, with the King of
the Hundred Knights, King Anguisant, King Yder, and the Duke of
Cambinet, will take fifteen thousand men and make a circuit, meanwhile
that ye do hold the battle with twelve thousand. Then coming suddenly we
will fall fiercely on them from behind and put them to the rout, but
else shall we never stand against them."

So Lot and four kings departed with their party to one side, and the six
other kings dressed their ranks against King Arthur and fought long and
stoutly.

But now Kings Ban and Bors, with all their army fresh and eager, broke
from their ambush and met face to face the five kings and their host as
they came round behind, and then began a frantic struggle with breaking
of spears and clashing of swords and slaying of men and horses. Anon
King Lot, espying in the midst King Bors, cried out in great dismay,
"Our Lady now defend us from our death and fearful wounds; our peril
groweth great, for yonder cometh one of the worshipfullest kings and
best knights in all the world."

"Who is he?" said the King of the Hundred Knights.

"It is King Bors of Gaul," replied King Lot, "and much I marvel how he
may have come with all his host into this land without our knowledge."

"Aha!" cried King Carados, "I will encounter with this king if ye will
rescue me when there is need."

"Ride on," said they.

So King Carados and all his host rode softly till they came within a
bow-shot of King Bors, and then both hosts, spurring their horses to
their greatest swiftness, rushed at each other. And King Bors
encountered in the onset with a knight, and struck him through with a
spear, so that he fell dead upon the earth; then drawing his sword, he
did such mighty feats of arms that all who saw him gazed with wonder.
Anon King Ban came also forth upon the field with all his knights, and
added yet more fury, sound, and slaughter, till at length both hosts of
the eleven kings began to quake, and drawing all together into one body,
they prepared to meet the worst, while a great multitude already fled.

Then said King Lot, "Lords, we must take yet other means, or worse loss
still awaits us. See ye not what people we have lost in waiting on the
footmen, and that it costs ten horsemen to save one of them? Therefore
it is my counsel to put away our footmen from us, for it is almost
night, and King Arthur will not stay to slaughter them. So they can save
their lives in this great wood hard by. Then let us gather into one
band all the horsemen that remain, and whoso breaketh rank or leaveth
us, let him be straightway slain by him that seeth him, for it is better
that we slay a coward than through a coward be all slain. How say ye?"
said King Lot; "answer me, all ye kings."

"It is well said," replied they all.

And swearing they would never fail each other, they mended and set right
their armor and their shields, and took new spears and set them
steadfastly against their thighs, waiting, and so stood still as a clump
of trees stands on the plain; and no assaults could shake them, they
held so hard together; which when King Arthur saw he marveled greatly,
and was very wroth. "Yet," cried he, "I may not blame them, by my faith,
for they do as brave men ought to do, and are the best fighting men and
knights of most prowess that I ever saw or heard tell of." And so said
also Kings Ban and Bors, and praised them greatly for their noble
chivalry.

But now came forty noble knights out of King Arthur's host, and prayed
that he would suffer them to break the enemy. And when they were
allowed, they rode forth with their spears upon their thighs, and
spurred their horses to their hottest. Then the eleven kings, with a
party of their knights, rushed with set spears as fast and mightily to
meet them; and when they were encountered, all the crash and splinter of
their spears and armor rang with a mighty din, and so fierce and bloody
was their onset that in all that day there had been no such cruel press,
and rage, and smiting. At that same moment rode fiercely into the
thickest of the struggle King Arthur and Kings Ban and Bors, and slew
downright on both hands right and left, until their horses went in blood
up to the fetlocks.

And while the slaughter and the noise and shouting were at their
greatest, suddenly there came down through the battle Merlin the Wizard,
upon a great black horse, and riding to King Arthur, he cried out,
"Alas, my Lord! will ye have never done? Of sixty thousand have ye left
but fifteen thousand men alive. Is it not time to stay this slaying? for
God is ill pleased with ye that ye have never ended, and yonder kings
shall not be altogether overthrown this time. But if ye fall upon them
any more, the fortune of this day will turn, and go to them. Withdraw,
Lord, therefore, to thy lodging, and there now take thy rest, for to-day
thou hast won a great victory, and overcome the noblest chivalry of all
the world. And now for many years those kings shall not disturb thee.
Therefore, I tell thee, fear them no more, for now they are sore beaten,
and have nothing left them but their honor; and why shouldest thou slay
them to take that?"

Then said King Arthur, "Thou sayest well, and I will take thy counsel."
With that he cried out, "Ho!" for the battle to cease, and sent forth
heralds through the field to stay more fighting. And gathering all the
spoil, he gave it not amongst his own host, but to Kings Ban and Bors
and all their knights and men-at-arms, that he might treat them with the
greater courtesy as strangers.

Then Merlin took his leave of Arthur and the two other kings, and went
to see his master, Blaise, a holy hermit, dwelling in Northumberland,
who had nourished him through all his youth. And Blaise was passing glad
to see him, for there was a great love ever between them; and Merlin
told him how King Arthur had sped in the battle, and how it had ended;
and told him the names of every king and knight of worship who was
there. So Blaise wrote down the battle, word for word, as Merlin told
him; and in the same way ever after, all the battles of King Arthur's
days Merlin caused Blaise, his master, to record.




III