Being now happily married, King Arthur for a season took his pleasure,
with great tournaments, and jousts, and huntings. So once upon a time
the king and many of his knights rode hunting in a forest, and Arthur,
King Urience, and Sir Accolon of Gaul, followed after a great hart, and
being all three well mounted, they chased so fast that they outsped
their company, and left them many miles behind; but riding still as
rapidly as they could go, at length their horses fell dead under them.
Then being all three on foot, and seeing the stag not far before them,
very weary and nigh spent--"What shall we do," said King Arthur, "for we
are hard bested?" "Let us go on afoot," said King Urience, "till we can
find some lodging." At that they saw the stag lying upon the bank of a
great lake, with a hound springing at his throat, and many other hounds
trooping towards him. So, running forward, Arthur blew the death-note on
his horn, and slew the hart. Then lifting up his eyes he saw before him
on the lake a barge, all draped down to the water's edge, with silken
folds and curtains, which swiftly came towards him, and touched upon
the sands; but when he went up close and looked in, he saw no earthly
creature. Then he cried out to his companions, "Sirs, come ye hither,
and let us see what there is in this ship." So they all three went in,
and found it everywhere throughout furnished, and hung with rich
draperies of silk and gold.

By this time eventide had come, when suddenly a hundred torches were set
up on all sides of the barge, and gave a dazzling light, and at the same
time came forth twelve fair damsels, and saluted King Arthur by his
name, kneeling on their knees, and telling him that he was welcome, and
should have their noblest cheer, for which the king thanked them
courteously. Then did they lead him and his fellows to a splendid
chamber, where was a table spread with all the richest furniture, and
costliest wines and viands; and there they served them with all kinds of
wines and meats, till Arthur wondered at the splendor of the feast,
declaring he had never in his life supped better, or more royally. After
supper they led him to another chamber, than which he had never beheld a
richer, where he was left to rest. King Urience, also, and Sir Accolon
were each conducted into rooms of like magnificence. And so they all
three fell asleep, and being very weary slept deeply all that night.

But when the morning broke, King Urience found himself in his own house
in Camelot, he knew not how; and Arthur awaking found himself in a dark
dungeon, and heard around him nothing but the groans of woeful knights,
prisoners like himself. Then said King Arthur, "Who are ye, thus
groaning and complaining?" And some one answered him, "Alas, we be all
prisoners, even twenty good knights, and some of us have lain here seven
years--some more--nor seen the light of day for all that time." "For
what cause?" said King Arthur. "Know ye not then yourself?" they
answered--"we will soon tell you. The lord of this strong castle is Sir
Damas, and is the falsest and most traitorous knight that liveth; and he
hath a younger brother, a good and noble knight, whose name is Outzlake.
This traitor Damas, although passing rich, will give his brother nothing
of his wealth, and save what Outzlake keepeth to himself by force, he
hath no share of the inheritance. He owneth, nevertheless, one fair rich
manor, whereupon he liveth, loved of all men far and near. But Damas is
as altogether hated as his brother is beloved, for he is merciless and
cowardly: and now for many years there hath been war between these
brothers, and Sir Outzlake evermore defieth Damas to come forth and
fight with him, body to body, for the inheritance; and if he be too
cowardly, to find some champion knight that will fight for him. And
Damas hath agreed to find some champion, but never yet hath found a
knight to take his evil cause in hand, or wager battle for him. So with
a strong band of men-at-arms he lieth ever in ambush, and taketh captive
every passing knight who may unwarily go near and bringeth him into this
castle, and desireth him either to fight Sir Outzlake, or to lie for
evermore indurance. And thus hath he dealt with all of us, for we all
scorned to take up such a cause for such a false foul knight--but rather
one by one came here, where many a good knight hath died of hunger and
disease. But if one of us would fight, Sir Damas would deliver all the
rest."

"God of his mercy send you deliverance," said King Arthur, and sat
turning in his mind how all these things should end, and how he might
himself gain freedom for so many noble hearts.

Anon there came a damsel to the king, saying, "Sir, if thou wilt fight
for my lord thou shalt be delivered out of prison, but else nevermore
shalt thou escape with thy life." "Nay," said King Arthur, "that is but
a hard choice, yet had I rather fight than die in prison, and if I may
deliver not myself alone, but all these others, I will do the battle."
"Yea," said the damsel, "it shall be even so." "Then," said King Arthur,
"I am ready now, if but I had a horse and armor." "Fear not," said she,
"that shalt thou have presently, and shalt lack nothing proper for the
fight." "Have I not seen thee," said the king, "at King Arthur's court?
for it seemeth that thy face is known to me." "Nay," said the damsel, "I
was never there; I am Sir Damas' daughter, and have never been but a
day's journey from this castle." But she spoke falsely, for she was one
of the damsels of Morgan le Fay, the great enchantress, who was King
Arthur's half-sister.

When Sir Damas knew that there had been at length a knight found who
would fight for him, he sent for Arthur, and finding him a man so tall
and strong, and straight of limb, he was passingly well pleased, and
made a covenant with him, that he should fight unto the uttermost for
his cause, and that all the other knights should be delivered. And when
they were sworn to each other on the Holy Gospels, all those imprisoned
knights were straightway led forth and delivered, but abode there one
and all to see the battle.

In the meanwhile there had happened to Sir Accolon of Gaul a strange
adventure; for when he awoke from his deep sleep upon the silken barge,
he found himself upon the edge of a deep well, and in instant peril of
falling thereinto. Whereat, leaping up in great affright, he crossed
himself and cried aloud, "May God preserve my lord King Arthur and King
Urience, for those damsels in the ship have betrayed us, and were
doubtless devils and no women; and if I may escape this misadventure, I
will certainly destroy them wheresoever I may find them." With that
there came to him a dwarf with a great mouth, and a flat nose, and
saluted him, saying that he came from Queen Morgan le Fay. "And she
greeteth you well," said he, "and biddeth you be strong of heart, for
to-morrow you shall do battle with a strange knight, and therefore she
hath sent you here Excalibur, King Arthur's sword, and the scabbard
likewise. And she desireth you as you do love her to fight this battle
to the uttermost, and without any mercy, as you have promised her you
would fight when she should require it of you; and she will make a rich
queen forever of any damsel that shall bring her that knight's head
with whom you are to fight."

"Well," said Sir Accolon, "tell you my lady Queen Morgan, that I shall
hold to that I promised her, now that I have this sword--and," said he,
"I suppose it was to bring about this battle that she made all these
enchantments by her craft." "You have guessed rightly," said the dwarf,
and therewithal he left him.

Then came a knight and lady, and six squires, to Sir Accolon, and took
him to a manor house hard by, and gave him noble cheer; and the house
belonged to Sir Outzlake, the brother of Sir Damas, for so had Morgan le
Fay contrived with her enchantments. Now Sir Outzlake himself was at
that time sorely wounded and disabled, having been pierced through both
his thighs by a spear-thrust. When, therefore, Sir Damas sent down
messengers to his brother, bidding him make ready by to-morrow morning,
and be in the field to fight with a good knight, for that he had found a
champion ready to do battle at all points, Sir Outzlake was sorely
annoyed and distressed, for he knew he had small chance of victory,
while yet he was disabled by his wounds; notwithstanding, he determined
to take the battle in hand, although he was so weak that he must needs
be lifted to his saddle. But when Sir Accolon of Gaul heard this, he
sent a message to Sir Outzlake offering to take the battle in his stead,
which cheered Sir Outzlake mightily, who thanked Sir Accolon with all
his heart, and joyfully accepted him.

So, on the morrow, King Arthur was armed and well horsed, and asked Sir
Damas, "When shall we go to the field?" "Sir," said Sir Damas, "you
shall first hear mass." And when mass was done, there came a squire on a
great horse, and asked Sir Damas if his knight were ready, "for our
knight is already in the field." Then King Arthur mounted on horseback,
and there around were all the knights, and barons, and people of the
country; and twelve of them were chosen to wait upon the two knights who
were about to fight. And as King Arthur sat on horseback, there came a
damsel from Morgan le Fay, and brought to him a sword, made like
Excalibur, and a scabbard also, and said to him, "Morgan le Fay sendeth
you here your sword for her great love's sake." And the king thanked
her, and believed it to be as she said; but she traitorously deceived
him, for both sword and scabbard were counterfeit, brittle, and false,
and the true sword Excalibur was in the hands of Sir Accolon. Then, at
the sound of a trumpet, the champions set themselves on opposite side of
the field, and giving rein and spur to their horses urged them to so
great a speed that each smiting the other in the middle of the shield,
rolled his opponent to the ground, both horse and man. Then starting up
immediately, both drew their swords and rushed swiftly together. And so
they fell to eagerly, and gave each other many great and mighty strokes.

And as they were thus fighting, the damsel Vivien, lady of the lake, who
loved King Arthur, came upon the ground, for she knew by her
enchantments how Morgan le Fay had craftily devised to have King Arthur
slain by his own sword that day, and therefore came to save his life.
And Arthur and Sir Accolon were now grown hot against each other, and
spared not strength nor fury in their fierce assaults; but the king's
sword gave way continually before Sir Accolon's, so that at every stroke
he was sore wounded, and his blood ran from him so fast that it was a
marvel he could stand. When King Arthur saw the ground so sore
be-blooded, he bethought him in dismay that there was magic treason
worked upon him, and that his own true sword was changed, for it seemed
to him that the sword in Sir Accolon's hand was Excalibur, for fearfully
it drew his blood at every blow, while what he held himself kept no
sharp edge, nor fell with any force upon his foe.

"Now, knight, look to thyself, and keep thee well from me," cried out
Sir Accolon. But King Arthur answered not, and gave him such a buffet on
the helm as made him stagger and nigh fall upon the ground. Then Sir
Accolon withdrew a little, and came on with Excalibur on high, and smote
King Arthur in return with such a mighty stroke as almost felled him;
and both being now in hottest wrath, they gave each other grievous and
savage blows. But Arthur all the time was losing so much blood that
scarcely could he keep upon his feet, yet so full was he of knighthood,
that knightly he endured the pain, and still sustained himself, though
now he was so feeble that he thought himself about to die. Sir Accolon,
as yet, had lost no drop of blood, and being very bold and confident in
Excalibur, even grew more vigorous and hasty in his assaults. But all
men who beheld them said they never saw a knight fight half so well as
did King Arthur, and all the people were so grieved for him that they
besought Sir Damas and Sir Outzlake to make up their quarrel and so stay
the fight; but they would not.

So still the battle raged, till Arthur drew a little back for breath and
a few moments' rest; but Accolon came on after him, following fiercely
and crying loud, "It is no time for me to suffer thee to rest," and
therewith set upon him. Then Arthur, full of scorn and rage, lifted up
his sword and struck Sir Accolon upon the helm so mightily that he drove
him to his knees; but with the force of that great stroke his brittle,
treacherous sword broke short off at the hilt, and fell down in the
grass among the blood, leaving the pommel only in his hand. At that,
King Arthur thought within himself that all was over, and secretly
prepared his mind for death, yet kept himself so knightly sheltered by
his shield that he lost no ground, and made as though he yet had hope
and cheer. Then said Sir Accolon, "Sir knight, thou now art overcome and
canst endure no longer, seeing thou art weaponless, and hast lost
already so much blood. Yet am I fully loth to slay thee; yield, then,
therefore, to me as recreant." "Nay," said King Arthur, "that may I not,
for I have promised to do battle to the uttermost by the faith of my
body while my life lasteth; and I had rather die with honor than live
with shame; and if it were possible for me to die an hundred times, I
had rather die as often than yield me to thee, for though I lack
weapons, I shall lack no worship, and it shall be to thy shame to slay
me weaponless." "Aha," shouted then Sir Accolon, "as for the shame, I
will not spare; look to thyself, sir knight, for thou art even now but a
dead man." Therewith he drove at him with pitiless force, and struck him
nearly down; but Arthur evermore waxing in valor as he waned in blood,
pressed on Sir Accolon with his shield, and hit at him so fiercely with
the pommel in his hand, as hurled him three strides backward.

This, therefore, so confused Sir Accolon, that rushing up, all dizzy, to
deliver once again a furious blow, even as he struck, Excalibur, by
Vivien's magic, fell from out his hands upon the earth. Beholding which,
King Arthur lightly sprang to it, and grasped it, and forthwith felt it
was his own good sword, and said to it, "Thou hast been from me all too
long, and done me too much damage." Then spying the scabbard hanging by
Sir Accolon's side, he sprang and pulled it from him, and cast it away
as far as he could throw it; for so long as he had worn it, Arthur knew
his life would have been kept secure. "Oh, knight!" then said the king,
"thou hast this day wrought me much damage by this sword, but now art
thou come to thy death, for I shall not warrant thee but that thou shalt
suffer, ere we part, somewhat of that thou hast made me suffer." And
therewithal King Arthur flew at him with all his might, and pulled him
to the earth, and then struck off his helm, and gave him on the head a
fearful buffet, till the blood leaped forth. "Now will I slay thee!"
cried King Arthur; for his heart was hardened, and his body all on fire
with fever, till for a moment he forgot his knightly mercy. "Slay me
thou mayest," said Sir Accolon, "for thou art the best knight I ever
found, and I see well that God is with thee; and I, as thou hast, have
promised to fight this battle to the uttermost, and never to be recreant
while I live; therefore shall I never yield me with my mouth, and God
must do with my body what he will." And as Sir Accolon spoke, King
Arthur thought he knew his voice; and parting all his blood-stained hair
from out his eyes, and leaning down towards him, saw, indeed, it was his
friend and own true knight. Then said he--keeping his own visor down--"I
pray thee tell me of what country art thou, and what court?" "Sir
knight," he answered, "I am of King Arthur's court, and my name is Sir
Accolon of Gaul." Then said the king, "Oh, sir knight! I pray thee tell
me who gave thee this sword? and from whom thou hadst it?"

Then said Sir Accolon, "Woe worth this sword, for by it I have gotten my
death. This sword hath been in my keeping now for almost twelve months,
and yesterday Queen Morgan le Fay, wife of King Urience, sent it to me
by a dwarf, that therewith I might in some way slay her brother, King
Arthur; for thou must understand that King Arthur is the man she hateth
most in all the world, being full of envy and jealousy because he is of
greater worship and renown than any other of her blood. She loveth me
also as much as she doth hate him; and if she might contrive to slay
King Arthur by her craft and magic, then would she straightway kill her
husband also, and make me the king of all this land, and herself my
queen, to reign with me; but now," said he, "all that is over, for this
day I am come to my death."

"It would have been sore treason of thee to destroy thy lord," said
Arthur. "Thou sayest truly," answered he; "but now that I have told
thee, and openly confessed to thee all that foul treason whereof I now
do bitterly repent, tell me, I pray thee, whence art thou, and of what
court?" "O, Sir Accolon!" said King Arthur, "learn that I am myself King
Arthur." When Sir Accolon heard this he cried aloud, "Alas, my gracious
lord! have mercy on me, for I knew thee not." "Thou shalt have mercy,"
said he, "for thou knewest not my person at this time; and though by
thine own confession thou art a traitor, yet do I blame thee less,
because thou hast been blinded by the false crafts of my sister Morgan
le Fay, whom I have trusted more than all others of my kin, and whom I
now shall know well how to punish." Then did Sir Accolon cry loudly, "O,
lords, and all good people! this noble knight that I have fought with is
the noblest and most worshipful in all the world; for it is King Arthur,
our liege lord and sovereign king; and full sorely I repent that I have
ever lifted lance against him, though in ignorance I did it."

Then all the people fell down on their knees and prayed the pardon of
the king for suffering him to come to such a strait. But he replied,
"Pardon ye cannot have, for, truly, ye have nothing sinned; but here ye
see what ill adventure may ofttimes befall knights-errant, for to my own
hurt, and his danger also, I have fought with one of my own knights."

Then the king commanded Sir Damas to surrender to his brother the whole
manor, Sir Outzlake only yielding him a palfrey every year; "for," said
he scornfully, "it would become thee better to ride on than a courser;"
and ordered Damas, upon pain of death, never again to touch or to
distress knights-errant riding on their adventures; and also to make
full compensation and satisfaction to the twenty knights whom he had
held in prison. "And if any of them," said the king, "come to my court
complaining that he hath not had full satisfaction of thee for his
injuries, by my head, thou shalt die therefor."

Afterwards, King Arthur asked Sir Outzlake to come with him to his
court, where he should become a knight of his, and, if his deeds were
noble, be advanced to all he might desire.

So then he took his leave of all the people and mounted upon horseback,
and Sir Accolon went with him to an abbey hard by, where both their
wounds were dressed. But Sir Accolon died within four days after. And
when he was dead, the king sent his body to Queen Morgan, to Camelot,
saying that he sent her a present in return for the sword Excalibur
which she had sent him by the damsel.

So, on the morrow, there came a damsel from Queen Morgan to the king,
and brought with her the richest mantle that ever was seen, for it was
set as full of precious stones as they could stand against each other,
and they were the richest stones that ever the king saw. And the damsel
said, "Your sister sendeth you this mantle, and prayeth you to take her
gift, and in whatsoever thing she hath offended you, she will amend it
at your pleasure." To this the king replied not, although the mantle
pleased him much. With that came in the lady of the lake, and said,
"Sir, put not on this mantle till thou hast seen more; and in nowise let
it be put upon thee, or any of thy knights, till ye have made the
bringer of it first put it on her." "It shall be done as thou dost
counsel," said the king. Then said he to the damsel that came from his
sister, "Damsel, I would see this mantle ye have brought me upon
yourself." "Sir," said she, "it will not beseem me to wear a knight's
garment." "By my head," said King Arthur, "thou shalt wear it ere it go
on any other person's back!" And so they put it on her by force, and
forthwith the garment burst into a flame and burned the damsel into
cinders. When the king saw that, he hated that false witch Morgan le Fay
with all his heart, and evermore was deadly quarrel between her and
Arthur to their lives' end.




VIII