And now again the second time there came ambassadors from Lucius
Tiberius, Emperor of Rome, demanding, under pain of war, tribute and
homage from King Arthur, and the restoration of all Gaul, which he had
conquered from the tribune Flollo.

When they had delivered their message, the king bade them withdraw while
he consulted with his knights and barons what reply to send. Then some
of the younger knights would have slain the ambassadors, saying that
their speech was a rebuke to all who heard the king insulted by it. But
when King Arthur heard that, he ordered none to touch them upon pain of
death; and sending officers, he had them taken to a noble lodging, and
there entertained with the best cheer. "And," said he, "let no dainty be
spared, for the Romans are great lords; and though their message please
me not, yet must I remember mine honor."

Then the lords and knights of the Round Table were called on to declare
their counsel--what should be done upon this matter; and Sir Cador of
Cornwall speaking first, said, "Sir, this message is the best news I
have heard for a long time, for we have been now idle and at rest for
many days, and I trust that thou wilt make sharp war upon the Romans,
wherein, I doubt not, we shall all gain honor."

"I believe well," said Arthur, "that thou art pleased, Sir Cador; but
that is scarce an answer to the Emperor of Rome, and his demand doth
grieve me sorely, for truly I will never pay him tribute; wherefore,
lords, I pray ye counsel me. Now, I have understood that Belinus and
Brennius, knights of Britain, held the Roman Empire in their hands for
many days, and also Constantine, the son of Helen, which is open
evidence, not only that we owe Rome no tribute, but that I, being
descended from them, may, of right, myself claim the empire."

Then said King Anguish of Scotland, "Sir, thou oughtest of right to be
above all other kings, for in all Christendom is there not thine equal;
and I counsel thee never to obey the Romans. For when they reigned here
they grievously distressed us, and put the land to great and heavy
burdens; and here, for my part, I swear to avenge me on them when I may,
and will furnish thee with twenty thousand men-at-arms, whom I will pay
and keep, and who shall wait on thee with me, when it shall please
thee."

Then the King of Little Britain rose and promised King Arthur thirty
thousand men; and likewise many other kings, and dukes, and barons,
promised aid--as the lord of West Wales thirty thousand men, Sir Ewaine
and his cousin thirty thousand men, and so forth; Sir Lancelot also, and
every other knight of the Round Table, promised each man a great host.

So the king, passing joyful at their courage and good will, thanked them
all heartily, and sent for the ambassadors again, to hear his answer. "I
will," said he, "that ye now go back straightway unto the Emperor your
master, and tell him that I give no heed to his words, for I have
conquered all my kingdoms by the will of God and by my own right arm,
and I am strong enough to keep them, without paying tribute to any
earthly creature. But, on the other hand, I claim both tribute and
submission from himself, and also claim the sovereignty of all his
empire, whereto I am entitled by the right of my own ancestors--sometime
kings of this land. And say to him that I will shortly come to Rome, and
by God's grace will take possession of my empire and subdue all rebels.
Wherefore, lastly, I command him and all the lords of Rome that they
forthwith pay me their homage, under pain of my chastisement and wrath."

Then he commanded his treasurers to give the ambassadors great gifts,
and defray all their charges, and appointed Sir Cador to convey them
worshipfully out of the land.

So when they returned to Rome and came before Lucius, he was sore angry
at their words, and said, "I thought this Arthur would have instantly
obeyed my orders and have served me as humbly as any other king; but
because of his fortune in Gaul, he hath grown insolent."

"Ah, lord," said one of the ambassadors, "refrain from such vain words,
for truly I and all with me were fearful at his royal majesty and angry
countenance. I fear me thou hast made a rod for thee more sharp than
thou hast counted on. He meaneth to be master of this empire; and is
another kind of man than thou supposest, and holdeth the most noble
court of all the world. We saw him on the new year's day, served at his
table by nine kings, and the noblest company of other princes, lords,
and knights that ever was in all the world; and in his person he is the
most manly-seeming man that liveth, and looketh like to conquer all the
earth."

Then Lucius sent messengers to all the subject countries of Rome, and
brought together a mighty army, and assembled sixteen kings, and many
dukes, princes, lords, and admirals, and a wondrous great multitude of
people. Fifty giants also, born of fiends, were set around him for a
body-guard. With all that host he straightway went from Rome, and passed
beyond the mountains into Gaul, and burned the towns and ravaged all the
country of that province, in rage for its submission to King Arthur.
Then he moved on towards Little Britain.

Meanwhile, King Arthur having held a parliament at York, left the realm
in charge of Sir Badewine and Sir Constantine, and crossed the sea from
Sandwich to meet Lucius. And so soon as he was landed, he sent Sir
Gawain, Sir Bors, Sir Lionel, and Sir Bedivere to the Emperor,
commanding him "to move swiftly and in haste out of his land, and, if
not, to make himself ready for battle, and not continue ravaging the
country and slaying harmless people." Anon, those noble knights attired
themselves and set forth on horseback to where they saw, in a meadow,
many silken tents of divers colors, and the Emperor's pavilion in the
midst, with a golden eagle set above it.

Then Sir Gawain and Sir Bors rode forward, leaving the other two behind
in ambush, and gave King Arthur's message. To which the Emperor replied,
"Return, and tell your lord that I am come to conquer him and all his
land."

At this, Sir Gawain burned with anger, and cried out, "I had rather than
all France that I might fight with thee alone!"

"And I also," said Sir Bors.

Then a knight named Ganius, a near cousin of the Emperor, laughed out
aloud, and said, "Lo! how these Britons boast and are full of pride,
bragging as though they bare up all the world!"

At these words, Sir Gawain could refrain no longer, but drew forth his
sword and with one blow shore off Ganius' head; then with Sir Bors, he
turned his horse and rode over waters and through woods, back to the
ambush, where Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere were waiting. The Romans
followed fast behind them till the knights turned and stood, and then
Sir Bors smote the foremost of them through the body with a spear, and
slew him on the spot. Then came on Calibere, a huge Pavian, but Sir Bors
overthrew him also. And then the company of Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere
brake forth from their ambush and fell on the Romans, and slew and
hewed them down, and forced them to return and flee, chasing them to
their tents.

But as they neared the camp, a great host more rushed forth, and turned
the battle backwards, and in the turmoil, Sir Bors and Sir Berel fell
into the Romans' hands. When Sir Gawain saw that, he drew his good sword
Galotine, and swore to see King Arthur's face no more if those two
knights were not delivered; and then, with good Sir Idrus, made so sore
an onslaught that the Romans fled and left Sir Bors and Sir Berel to
their friends. So the Britons returned in triumph to King Arthur, having
slain more than ten thousand Romans, and lost no man of worship from
amongst themselves.

When the Emperor Lucius heard of that discomfiture he arose, with all
his army, to crush King Arthur, and met him in the vale of Soissons.
Then speaking to all his host, he said, "Sirs, I admonish you that this
day ye fight and acquit yourselves as men; and remembering how Rome is
chief of all the earth, and mistress of the universal world, suffer not
these barbarous and savage Britons to abide our onset." At that, the
trumpets blew so loud, that the ground trembled and shook.

Then did the rival hosts draw near each other with great shoutings; and
when they closed, no tongue can tell the fury of their smiting, and the
sore struggling, wounds, and slaughter. Then King Arthur, with his
mightiest knights, rode down into the thickest of the fight, and drew
Excalibur, and slew as lightning slays for swiftness and for force. And
in the midmost crowd he met a giant, Galapas by name, and struck off
both his legs at the knee-joints; then saying, "Now art thou a better
size to deal with!" smote his head off at a second blow: and the body
killed six men in falling down.

Anon, King Arthur spied where Lucius fought and worked great deeds of
prowess with his own hands. Forthwith he rode at him, and each attacked
the other passing fiercely; till at the last, Lucius struck King Arthur
with a fearful wound across the face, and Arthur, in return, lifting up
Excalibur on high, drove it with all his force upon the Emperor's head,
shivering his helmet, crashing his head in halves, and splitting his
body to the breast. And when the Romans saw their Emperor dead, they
fled in hosts of thousands; and King Arthur and his knights, and all his
army followed them, and slew one hundred thousand men.

Then returning to the field, King Arthur rode to the place where Lucius
lay dead, and round him the kings of Egypt and Ethiopia, and seventeen
other kings, with sixty Roman senators, all noble men. All these he
ordered to be carefully embalmed with aromatic gums, and laid in leaden
coffins, covered with their shields and arms and banners. Then calling
for three senators who were taken prisoners, he said to them, "As the
ransom of your lives, I will that ye take these dead bodies and carry
them to Rome, and there present them for me, with these letters saying I
will myself be shortly there. And I suppose the Romans will beware how
they again ask tribute of me; for tell them, these dead bodies that I
send them are for the tribute they have dared to ask of me; and if they
wish for more, when I come I will pay them the rest."

So, with that charge, the three senators departed with the dead bodies,
and went to Rome; the body of the Emperor being carried in a chariot
blazoned with the arms of the empire, all alone, and the bodies of the
kings two and two in chariots following.

After the battle, King Arthur entered Lorraine, Brabant, and Flanders,
and thence, subduing all the countries as he went, passed into Germany,
and so beyond the mountains into Lombardy and Tuscany. At length he came
before a city which refused to obey him, wherefore he sat down before it
to besiege it. And after a long time thus spent, King Arthur called Sir
Florence, and told him they began to lack food for his hosts--"And not
far from hence," said he, "are great forests full of cattle belonging to
my enemies. Go then, and bring by force all that thou canst find; and
take with thee Sir Gawain, my nephew, and Sir Clegis, Sir Claremond, the
Captain of Cardiff, and a strong band."

Anon, those knights made ready, and rode over holts and hills, and
through forests and woods, till they came to a great meadow full of fair
flowers and grass, and there they rested themselves and their horses
that night. And at the dawn of the next day, Sir Gawain took his horse
and rode away from his fellows to seek some adventure. Soon he saw an
armed knight walking his horse by a wood's side, with his shield laced
to his shoulder, and no attendant with him save a page, bearing a mighty
spear; and on his shield were blazoned three gold griffins. When Sir
Gawain spied him, he put his spear in rest, and riding straight to him,
asked who he was. "A Tuscan," said he; "and thou mayest prove me when
thou wilt, for thou shalt be my prisoner ere we part."

Then said Sir Gawain, "Thou vauntest thee greatly, and speakest proud
words; yet I counsel thee, for all thy boastings, look to thyself the
best thou canst."

At that they took their spears and ran at each other with all the might
they had, and smote each other through their shields into their
shoulders; and then drawing swords smote with great strokes, till the
fire sprang out of their helms. Then was Sir Gawain enraged, and with
his good sword Galotine struck his enemy through shield and hauberk, and
splintered into piece all the precious stones of it, and made so huge a
wound that men might see both lungs and liver. At that the Tuscan,
groaning loudly, rushed on to Sir Gawain, and gave him a deep slanting
stroke, and made a mighty wound and cut a great vein asunder, so that he
bled fast. Then he cried out, "Bind thy wound quickly up, Sir knight,
for thou be-bloodest all thy horse and thy fair armor, and all the
surgeons of the world shall never staunch thy blood; for so shall it be
to whomsoever is hurt with this good sword."

Then answered Sir Gawain, "It grieveth me but little, and thy boastful
words give me no fear, for thou shalt suffer greater grief and sorrow
ere we part; but tell me quickly who can staunch this blood."

"That can I do," said the strange knight, "and will, if thou wilt aid
and succor me to become christened, and to believe in God, which now I
do require of thee upon thy manhood."

"I am content," said Sir Gawain; "and may God help me to grant all thy
wishes. But tell me first, what soughtest thou thus here alone, and of
what land art thou?"

"Sir," said the knight, "my name is Prianius, and my father is a great
prince, who hath rebelled against Rome. He is descended from Alexander
and Hector, and of our lineage also were Joshua and Maccabaeus. I am of
right the king of Alexandria, and Africa, and all the outer isles, yet I
would believe in the Lord thou worshipest, and for thy labor I will give
thee treasure enough. I was so proud in heart that I thought none my
equal, but now have I encountered with thee, who hast given me my fill
of fighting; wherefore, I pray thee, Sir knight, tell me of thyself."

"I am no knight," said Sir Gawain; "I have been brought up many years in
the wardrobe of the noble prince King Arthur, to mind his armor and
array."

"Ah," said Prianius, "if his varlets be so keen and fierce, his knights
must be passing good! Now, for the love of heaven, whether thou be
knight or knave, tell me thy name."

"By heaven!" said Gawain, "now will I tell thee the truth. My name is
Sir Gawain, and I am a knight of the Round Table."

"Now am I better pleased," said Prianius, "than if thou hadst given me
all the province of Paris the rich. I had rather have been torn by wild
horses than that any varlet should have won such victory over me as thou
hast done. But now, Sir knight, I warn thee that close by is the Duke of
Lorraine, with sixty thousand good men of war; and we had both best flee
at once, for he will find us else, and we be sorely wounded and never
likely to recover. And let my page be careful that he blow no horn, for
hard by are a hundred knights, my servants; and if they seize thee, no
ransom of gold or silver would acquit thee."

Then Sir Gawain rode over a river to save himself, and Sir Prianius
after him, and so they both fled till they came to his companions who
were in the meadow, where they spent the night. When Sir Whishard saw
Sir Gawain so hurt, he ran to him weeping, and asked him who it was had
wounded him; and Sir Gawain told him how he had fought with that
man--pointing to Prianius--who had salves to heal them both. "But I can
tell ye other tidings," said he--"that soon we must encounter many
enemies, for a great army is close to us in our front."

Then Prianius and Sir Gawain alighted and let their horses graze while
they unarmed, and when they took this armor and their clothing off, the
hot blood ran down freshly from their wounds till it was piteous to
see. But Prianius took from his page a vial filled from the four rivers
that flow out of Paradise, and anointed both their wounds with a certain
balm, and washed them with that water, and within an hour afterwards
they were both as sound and whole as ever they had been. Then, at the
sound of a trumpet, all the knights were assembled to council; and after
much talking, Prianius said, "Cease your words, for I warn you in yonder
wood ye shall find knights out of number, who will put out cattle for a
decoy to lead you on; and ye are not seven hundred!"

"Nevertheless," said Sir Gawain, "let us at once encounter them, and see
what they can do; and may the best have the victory."

Then they saw suddenly an earl named Sir Ethelwold, and the Duke of
Duchmen come leaping out of ambush of the woods in front, with many a
thousand after them, and all rode straight down to the battle. And Sir
Gawain, full of ardor and courage, comforted his knights, saying, "They
all are ours." Then the seven hundred knights, in one close company, set
spurs to their horses and began to gallop, and fiercely met their
enemies. And then were men and horses slain and overthrown on every
side, and in and out amidst them all, the knights of the Round Table
pressed and thrust, and smote down to the earth all who withstood them,
till at length the whole of them turned back and fled.

"By heaven!" said Sir Gawain, "this gladdeneth well my heart, for now
behold them as they flee! they are full seventy thousand less in number
than they were an hour ago!"

Thus was the battle quickly ended, and a great host of high lords and
knights of Lombardy and Saracens left dead upon the field. Then Sir
Gawain and his company collected a great plenty of cattle, and of gold
and silver, and all kind of treasure, and returned to King Arthur, where
he still kept the siege.

"Now God be thanked," cried he; "but who is he that standeth yonder by
himself, and seemeth not a prisoner?"

"Sir," said Sir Gawain, "he is a good man with his weapons, and hath
matched me; but cometh hither to be made a Christian. Had it not been
for his warnings, we none of us should have been here this day. I pray
thee, therefore, let him be baptized, for there can be few nobler men,
or better knights."

So Prianius was christened, and made a duke and knight of the Round
Table.

Presently afterwards, they made a last attack upon the city, and entered
by the walls on every side; and as the men were rushing to the pillage,
came the Duchess forth, with many ladies and damsels, and kneeled before
King Arthur; and besought him to receive their submission. To whom the
king made answer, with a noble countenance, "Madam, be well assured that
none shall harm ye, or your ladies; neither shall any that belong to
thee be hurt; but the Duke must abide my judgment." Then he commanded to
stay the assault and took the keys from the Duke's eldest son, who
brought them kneeling. Anon the Duke was sent a prisoner to Dover for
his life, and rents and taxes were assigned for dowry of the Duchess and
her children.

Then went he on with all his hosts, winning all towns and castles, and
wasting them that refused obedience, till he came to Viterbo. From
thence he sent to Rome, to ask the senators whether they would receive
him for their lord and governor. In answer, came out to him all the
Senate who remained alive, and the Cardinals, with a majestic retinue
and procession; and laying great treasures at his feet, they prayed him
to come in at once to Rome, and there be peaceably crowned as Emperor.
"At this next Christmas," said King Arthur, "will I be crowned, and hold
my Round Table in your city."

Anon he entered Rome, in mighty pomp and state; and after him came all
his hosts, and his knights, and princes, and great lords, arrayed in
gold and jewels, such as never were beheld before. And then was he
crowned Emperor by the Pope's hands, with all the highest solemnity that
could be made.

Then after his coronation, he abode in Rome for a season, settling his
lands and giving kingdoms to his knights and servants, to each one after
his deserving, and in such wise fashion that no man among them all
complained. Also he made many dukes and earls, and loaded all his
men-at-arms with riches and great treasures.

When all this was done, the lords and knights, and all the men of great
estate, came together before him, and said, "Noble Emperor! by the
blessing of Eternal God, thy mortal warfare is all finished, and thy
conquests all achieved; for now in all the world is none so great and
mighty as to dare make war with thee. Wherefore we beseech and heartily
pray thee of thy noble grace, to turn thee homeward, and give us also
leave to see our wives and homes again, for now we have been from them a
long season, and all thy journey is completed with great honor and
worship."

"Ye say well," replied he, "and to tempt God is no wisdom; therefore
make ready in all haste, and turn we home to England."

So King Arthur returned with his knights and lords and armies, in great
triumph and joy, through all the countries he had conquered, and
commanded that no man, upon pain of death, should rob or do any violence
by the way. And crossing the sea, he came at length to Sandwich, where
Queen Guinevere received him, and made great joy at his arrival. And
through all the realm of Britain was there such rejoicing as no tongue
can tell.




IX